<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Golden Bough (Vol. 1 of 2)</title>
      <author><name reg="Frazer, James George">James George Frazer</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>October 16, 2012</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">41082</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="el"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="sv"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
      <language id="nl"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2012-10-16">October 16, 2012</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by David Edwards, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously
            made available by The Internet Archive.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Golden Bough</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">A Study in Comparative Religion</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">James George Frazer, M.A.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Fellow of Trinity College, Cambridge</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">In Two Volumes.</p>
      <p rend="font-size: large; text-align: center">Vol. I.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York and London</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">MacMillan and Co.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1894</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<div>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
<figure url='images/cover.jpg' rend='width: 40%'>
<figDesc>Cover Art</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
<p>
[Transcriber's Note: The above cover image was produced by the submitter at
Distributed Proofreaders, and is being placed into the public domain.]
</p>
<p rend='text-align: center'>
<figure url='images/frontispiece.png' rend='width: 80%'>
<figDesc>Frontispiece</figDesc>
</figure>
</p>
</div>

<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Dedication.</head>

<p>
To My Friend
</p>

<p>
WILLIAM ROBERTSON SMITH
</p>

<p>
In Gratitude And Admiration
</p>

</div>

<pb n='vii'/><anchor id='Pgvii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Preface.</head>

<p>
For some time I have been preparing a general work
on primitive superstition and religion. Among the
problems which had attracted my attention was the
hitherto unexplained rule of the Arician priesthood;
and last spring it happened that in the course of my
reading I came across some facts which, combined
with others I had noted before, suggested an explanation
of the rule in question. As the explanation, if
correct, promised to throw light on some obscure
features of primitive religion, I resolved to develop it
fully, and, detaching it from my general work, to issue
it as a separate study. This book is the result.
</p>

<p>
Now that the theory, which necessarily presented
itself to me at first in outline, has been worked out in
detail, I cannot but feel that in some places I may
have pushed it too far. If this should prove to have
been the case, I will readily acknowledge and retract
my error as soon as it is brought home to me. Meantime
my essay may serve its purpose as a first attempt
to solve a difficult problem, and to bring a variety of
scattered facts into some sort of order and system.
</p>

<p>
A justification is perhaps needed of the length at
which I have dwelt upon the popular festivals observed
<pb n='viii'/><anchor id='Pgviii'/>
by European peasants in spring, at midsummer, and at
harvest. It can hardly be too often repeated, since it
is not yet generally recognised, that in spite of their
fragmentary character the popular superstitions and
customs of the peasantry are by far the fullest and
most trustworthy evidence we possess as to the primitive
religion of the Aryans. Indeed the primitive
Aryan, in all that regards his mental fibre and texture,
is not extinct. He is amongst us to this day. The
great intellectual and moral forces which have revolutionised
the educated world have scarcely affected
the peasant. In his inmost beliefs he is what his
forefathers were in the days when forest trees still
grew and squirrels played on the ground where Rome
and London now stand.
</p>

<p>
Hence every inquiry into the primitive religion of
the Aryans should either start from the superstitious
beliefs and observances of the peasantry, or should at
least be constantly checked and controlled by reference
to them. Compared with the evidence afforded by
living tradition, the testimony of ancient books on the
subject of early religion is worth very little. For
literature accelerates the advance of thought at a
rate which leaves the slow progress of opinion by
word of mouth at an immeasurable distance behind.
Two or three generations of literature may do more
to change thought than two or three thousand years
of traditional life. But the mass of the people who
do not read books remain unaffected by the mental
revolution wrought by literature; and so it has come
about that in Europe at the present day the superstitious
beliefs and practices which have been handed
<pb n='ix'/><anchor id='Pgix'/>
down by word of mouth are generally of a far more
archaic type than the religion depicted in the most
ancient literature of the Aryan race.
</p>

<p>
It is on these grounds that, in discussing the
meaning and origin of an ancient Italian priesthood, I
have devoted so much attention to the popular customs
and superstitions of modern Europe. In this part of
my subject I have made great use of the works of the
late W. Mannhardt, without which, indeed, my book
could scarcely have been written. Fully recognising
the truth of the principles which I have imperfectly
stated, Mannhardt set himself systematically to collect,
compare, and explain the living superstitions of the
peasantry. Of this wide field the special department
which he marked out for himself was the religion of
the woodman and the farmer, in other words, the
superstitious beliefs and rites connected with trees and
cultivated plants. By oral inquiry, and by printed
questions scattered broadcast over Europe, as well as
by ransacking the literature of folk-lore, he collected
a mass of evidence, part of which he published in a
series of admirable works. But his health, always
feeble, broke down before he could complete the comprehensive
and really vast scheme which he had
planned, and at his too early death much of his precious
materials remained unpublished. His manuscripts
are now deposited in the University Library at
Berlin, and in the interest of the study to which he
devoted his life it is greatly to be desired that they
should be examined, and that such portions of them as
he has not utilised in his books should be given to
the world.
</p>

<pb n='x'/><anchor id='Pgx'/>

<p>
Of his published works the most important are,
first, two tracts, <hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf und Roggenhund</hi>, Danzig
1865 (second edition, Danzig, 1866), and <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
Berlin, 1868. These little works were put
forward by him tentatively, in the hope of exciting
interest in his inquiries and thereby securing the help
of others in pursuing them. But, except from a few
learned societies, they met with very little attention.
Undeterred by the cold reception accorded to his
efforts he worked steadily on, and in 1875 published
his chief work, <hi rend='italic'>Der Baumkultus der Germanen und
ihrer Nachbarstämme</hi>. This was followed in 1877
by <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>. His <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, a posthumous work, appeared in 1884.<note place='foot'>For the sake of brevity I have
sometimes, in the notes, referred to
Mannhardt's works respectively as
<hi rend='italic'>Roggenwolf</hi> (the references are to the
pages of the first edition), <hi rend='italic'>Korndämonen</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Much as I owe to Mannhardt, I owe still more to
my friend Professor W. Robertson Smith. My interest
in the early history of society was first excited by the
works of Dr. E. B. Tylor, which opened up a mental
vista undreamed of by me before. But it is a long
step from a lively interest in a subject to a systematic
study of it; and that I took this step is due to the
influence of my friend W. Robertson Smith. The
debt which I owe to the vast stores of his knowledge,
the abundance and fertility of his ideas, and his
unwearied kindness, can scarcely be overestimated.
Those who know his writings may form some, though
a very inadequate, conception of the extent to which I
have been influenced by him. The views of sacrifice
set forth in his article <q>Sacrifice</q> in the <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
<pb n='xi'/><anchor id='Pgxi'/>
Britannica</hi>, and further developed in his recent work,
<hi rend='italic'>The Religion of the Semites</hi>, mark a new departure in
the historical study of religion, and ample traces of
them will be found in this book. Indeed the central
idea of my essay&mdash;the conception of the slain god&mdash;is
derived directly, I believe, from my friend. But it is
due to him to add that he is in no way responsible for
the general explanation which I have offered of the
custom of slaying the god. He has read the greater
part of the proofs in circumstances which enhanced the
kindness, and has made many valuable suggestions
which I have usually adopted; but except where he is
cited by name, or where the views expressed coincide
with those of his published works, he is not to be
regarded as necessarily assenting to any of the theories
propounded in this book.
</p>

<p>
The works of Professor G. A. Wilken of Leyden
have been of great service in directing me to the best
original authorities on the Dutch East Indies, a very
important field to the ethnologist. To the courtesy
of the Rev. Walter Gregor, M.A., of Pitsligo, I am
indebted for some interesting communications which
will be found acknowledged in their proper places.
Mr. Francis Darwin has kindly allowed me to consult
him on some botanical questions. The manuscript
authorities to which I occasionally refer are answers
to a list of ethnological questions which I am circulating.
Most of them will, I hope, be published in
the <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>.
</p>

<p>
The drawing of the Golden Bough which adorns
the cover is from the pencil of my friend Professor J.
H. Middleton. The constant interest and sympathy
<pb n='xii'/><anchor id='Pgxii'/>
which he has shown in the progress of the book
have been a great help and encouragement to me in
writing it.
</p>

<p>
The Index has been compiled by Mr. A. Rogers,
of the University Library, Cambridge.
</p>

<p>
J. G. FRAZER.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Trinity College, Cambridge</hi>,<lb/>
<hi rend='italic'>8th March 1890</hi>.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. The King Of The Wood.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The still glassy lake that sleeps</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 8'>Beneath Aricia's trees&mdash;</l>
<l>Those trees in whose dim shadow</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 8'>The ghastly priest doth reign,</l>
<l>The priest who slew the slayer,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 8'><q rend='post'>And shall himself be slain.</q></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Macaulay.</hi></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. The Arician Grove.'/>
<head>§ 1.&mdash;The Arician Grove.</head>

<p>
Who does not know Turner's picture of the Golden
Bough? The scene, suffused with the golden glow
of imagination in which the divine mind of Turner
steeped and transfigured even the fairest natural
landscape, is a dream-like vision of the little woodland
lake of Nemi, <q>Diana's Mirror,</q> as it was called
by the ancients. No one who has seen that calm
water, lapped in a green hollow of the Alban hills,
can ever forget it. The two characteristic Italian
villages which slumber on its banks, and the equally
Italian palazzo whose terraced gardens descend steeply
to the lake, hardly break the stillness and even the
solitariness of the scene. Dian herself might still
linger by this lonely shore, still haunt these woodlands
wild.
</p>

<pb n='002'/><anchor id='Pg002'/>

<p>
In antiquity this sylvan landscape was the scene
of a strange and recurring tragedy. On the northern
shore of the lake, right under the precipitous cliffs on
which the modern village of Nemi is perched, stood
the sacred grove and sanctuary of Diana Nemorensis,
or Diana of the Wood.<note place='foot'>The site was excavated in 1885
by Sir John Savile Lumley, English
ambassador at Rome. For a general
description of the site and excavations,
see the <hi rend='italic'>Athenaeum</hi>, 10th October 1885.
For details of the finds see <hi rend='italic'>Bulletino
dell' Instituto di Corrispondenza Archeologica</hi>,
1885, pp. 149 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 225 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The lake and the grove
were sometimes known as the lake and grove of
Aricia.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, vi. 756; Cato quoted
by Priscian, see Peter's <hi rend='italic'>Historic. Roman.
Fragmenta</hi>, p. 52 (lat. ed.); Statius,
<hi rend='italic'>Sylv.</hi> iii. 1, 56.</note> But the town of Aricia (the modern La
Riccia) was situated about three miles off, at the foot
of the Alban Mount, and separated by a steep descent
from the lake, which lies in a small crater-like hollow
on the mountain side. In this sacred grove there
grew a certain tree round which at any time of the
day and probably far into the night a strange figure
might be seen to prowl. In his hand he carried a
drawn sword, and he kept peering warily about him
as if every instant he expected to be set upon by an
enemy.<note place='foot'>ξιφήρης οὖν ἐστιν ἀεί, περισκοπῶν τὰς
ἐπιθέσεις, ἕτοιμος ἀμύνεσθαι, is Strabo's
description (v. 3, 12), who may have
seen him <q>pacing there alone.</q></note> He was a priest and a murderer; and the
man for whom he looked was sooner or later to
murder him and hold the priesthood in his stead.
Such was the rule of the sanctuary. A candidate for
the priesthood could only succeed to office by slaying
the priest, and having slain him he held office till he
was himself slain by a stronger or a craftier.
</p>

<p>
This strange rule has no parallel in classical
antiquity, and cannot be explained from it. To find
an explanation we must go farther afield. No one will
probably deny that such a custom savours of a barbarous
<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>
age and, surviving into imperial times, stands out
in striking isolation from the polished Italian society of
the day, like a primeval rock rising from a smooth-shaven
lawn. It is the very rudeness and barbarity of
the custom which allow us a hope of explaining it.
For recent researches into the early history of man
have revealed the essential similarity with which, under
many superficial differences, the human mind has
elaborated its first crude philosophy of life. Accordingly
if we can show that a barbarous custom, like that
of the priesthood of Nemi, has existed elsewhere; if we
can detect the motives which led to its institution; if
we can prove that these motives have operated widely,
perhaps universally, in human society, producing in
varied circumstances a variety of institutions specifically
different but generically alike; if we can show, lastly,
that these very motives, with some of their derivative
institutions, were actually at work in classical antiquity;
then we may fairly infer that at a remoter age the same
motives gave birth to the priesthood of Nemi. Such
an inference, in default of direct evidence as to how the
priesthood did actually arise, can never amount to
demonstration. But it will be more or less probable
according to the degree of completeness with which it
fulfils the conditions indicated above. The object of
this book is, by meeting these conditions, to offer a
fairly probable explanation of the priesthood of Nemi.
</p>

<p>
I begin by setting forth the few facts and legends
which have come down to us on the subject. According
to one story the worship of Diana at Nemi was instituted
by Orestes, who, after killing Thoas, King of the
Tauric Chersonese (the Crimea), fled with his sister to
Italy, bringing with him the image of the Tauric Diana.
The bloody ritual which legend ascribed to that goddess
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
is familiar to classical readers; it is said that every
stranger who landed on the shore was sacrificed on her
altar. But transported to Italy, the rite assumed a
milder form. Within the sanctuary at Nemi grew a
certain tree of which no branch might be broken.
Only a runaway slave was allowed to break off, if he
could, one of its boughs. Success in the attempt entitled
him to fight the priest in single combat, and if he
slew him he reigned in his stead with the title of King
of the Wood (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Rex Nemorensis</foreign>). Tradition averred
that the fateful branch was that Golden Bough which, at
the Sibyl's bidding, Aeneas plucked before he essayed
the perilous journey to the world of the dead. The
flight of the slave represented, it was said, the flight
of Orestes; his combat with the priest was a reminiscence
of the human sacrifices once offered to the Tauric
Diana. This rule of succession by the sword was
observed down to imperial times; for amongst his
other freaks Caligula, thinking that the priest of Nemi
had held office too long, hired a more stalwart ruffian
to slay him.<note place='foot'><p>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vi. 136 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Servius,
<hi rend='italic'>ad l.</hi>; Strabo, v. 3, 12; Pausanias, ii.
27; Solinus, ii. 11; Suetonius, <hi rend='italic'>Caligula</hi>,
35. For the title <q>King of the
Wood,</q> see Suetonius, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; and compare
Statius, <hi rend='italic'>Sylv.</hi> iii. 1, 55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Jamque dies aderat, profugis cum regibus aptum<lb/>
Fumat Aricinum Triviae nemus;</foreign></q>
</p>
<p>
Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iii. 271, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Regna tenent
fortesque manu, pedibusque fugaces</foreign>;</q>
<hi rend='italic'>id. Ars am.</hi> i. 259 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ecce suburbanae templum nemorale Dianae,<lb/>
Partaque per gladios regna nocente manu.</foreign></q>
</p></note>
</p>

<p>
Of the worship of Diana at Nemi two leading
features can still be made out. First, from the votive-offerings
found in modern times on the site, it appears
that she was especially worshipped by women desirous
of children or of an easy delivery.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bulletino dell' Instituto</hi>, 1885, p.
153 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Athenaeum</hi>, 10th October
1885; Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
i. 317. Of these votive offerings
some represent women with children in
their arms; one represents a delivery,
etc.</note> Second, fire seems
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
to have played a foremost part in her ritual. For
during her annual festival, celebrated at the hottest time
of the year, her grove was lit up by a multitude of
torches, whose ruddy glare was reflected by the waters
of the lake; and throughout the length and breadth of
Italy the day was kept with holy rites at every domestic
hearth.<note place='foot'><p>Statius, <hi rend='italic'>Sylv.</hi> iii. 1, 52 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> From
Martial, xii. 67, it has been inferred
that the Arician festival fell on the 13th
of August. The inference, however,
does not seem conclusive. Statius's
expression is:&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Tempus erat, caeli cum ardentissimus axis<lb/>
Incumbit terris, ictusque Hyperione multo<lb/>
Acer anhelantes incendit Sirius agros.</foreign></q>
</p></note> Moreover, women whose prayers had been
heard by the goddess brought lighted torches to the
grove in fulfilment of their vows.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iii. 269; Propertius,
iii. 24 (30), 9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> ed. Paley.</note> Lastly, the title of
Vesta borne by the Arician Diana<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Inscript. Lat.</hi> ed. Orelli, No. 1455.</note> points almost
certainly to the maintenance of a perpetual holy fire in
her sanctuary.
</p>

<p>
At her annual festival all young people went through
a purificatory ceremony in her honour; dogs were
crowned; and the feast consisted of a young kid, wine,
and cakes, served up piping hot on platters of leaves.<note place='foot'>Statius, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Gratius Faliscus, v.
483 sqq.</note>
</p>

<p>
But Diana did not reign alone in her grove at
Nemi. Two lesser divinities shared her forest sanctuary.
One was Egeria, the nymph of the clear water
which, bubbling from the basaltic rocks, used to fall in
graceful cascades into the lake at the place called Le
Mole.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Athenaeum</hi>, 10th October 1885.
The water was diverted a few years
ago to supply Albano. For Egeria,
compare Strabo, v. 3, 12; Ovid,
<hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iii. 273 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id. Met.</hi> xv. 487
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> According to one story the grove was first
consecrated to Diana by a Manius Egerius, who was
the ancestor of a long and distinguished line. Hence
the proverb <q>There are many Manii at Ariciae.</q>
Others explained the proverb very differently. They
said it meant that there were a great many ugly and
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
deformed people, and they referred to the word <foreign rend='italic'>Mania</foreign>
which meant a bogey or bugbear to frighten children.<note place='foot'>Festus, p. 145, ed. Müller; Schol.
on Persius, vi. 56 <hi rend='italic'>ap.</hi> Jahn on Macrobius,
i. 7, 35.</note>
</p>

<p>
The other of these minor deities was Virbius.
Legend had it that Virbius was the youthful Greek
hero Hippolytus, who had been killed by his horses
on the sea-shore of the Saronic Gulf. Him, to please
Diana, the leech Aesculapius brought to life again by
his simples. But Jupiter, indignant that a mortal man
should return from the gates of death, thrust down
the meddling leech himself to Hades; and Diana, for
the love she bore Hippolytus, carried him away to
Italy and hid him from the angry god in the dells
of Nemi, where he reigned a forest king under
the name of Virbius. Horses were excluded from
the grove and sanctuary, because horses had killed
Hippolytus.<note place='foot'>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vii. 761 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Servius,
<hi rend='italic'>ad l.</hi>; Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iii. 265 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id. Met.</hi> xv. 497 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Pausanias,
ii. 27.</note> Some thought that Virbius was the
sun. It was unlawful to touch his image.<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vii. 776.</note> His
worship was cared for by a special priest, the Flamen
Virbialis.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Inscript. Lat.</hi> ed. Orelli, Nos.
2212, 4022. The inscription No. 1457
(Orelli) is said to be spurious.</note>
</p>

<p>
Such then are the facts and theories bequeathed to
us by antiquity on the subject of the priesthood of
Nemi. From materials so slight and scanty it is
impossible to extract a solution of the problem. It
remains to try whether the survey of a wider field may
not yield us the clue we seek. The questions to be
answered are two: first, why had the priest to slay his
predecessor? and second, why, before he slew him, had
he to pluck the Golden Bough? The rest of this
book will be an attempt to answer these questions.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Primitive man and the supernatural.'/>
<head>§ 2.&mdash;Primitive man and the supernatural.</head>

<p>
The first point on which we fasten is the priest's
title. Why was he called the King of the Wood?
why was his office spoken of as a Kingdom?<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, note 1.</note>
</p>

<p>
The union of a royal title with priestly duties was
common in ancient Italy and Greece. At Rome and
in other Italian cities there was a priest called the
Sacrificial King or King of the Sacred Rites (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Rex
Sacrificulus</foreign> or <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Rex Sacrorum</foreign>), and his wife bore the
title of Queen of the Sacred Rites.<note place='foot'>Marquardt, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Staatsverwaltung</hi>,
iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 321 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In republican
Athens the second magistrate of the state was called
the King, and his wife the Queen; the functions of
both were religious.<note place='foot'>G. Gilbert, <hi rend='italic'>Handbuch der griechischen
Staatsalterthümer</hi>, i. 241 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Many other Greek democracies
had titular kings, whose duties, so far as they are
known, seem to have been priestly.<note place='foot'>Gilbert, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 323 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Rome the
tradition was that the Sacrificial King had been
appointed after the expulsion of the kings in order to
offer the sacrifices which had been previously offered
by the kings.<note place='foot'>Livy, ii. 2, 1; Dionysius Halic.
iv. 74, 4.</note> In Greece a similar view appears to
have prevailed as to the origin of the priestly kings.<note place='foot'>Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>contra Neacr.</hi> § 74,
p. 1370. Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Rom.</hi> 63.</note>
In itself the view is not improbable, and it is borne out
by the example of Sparta, the only purely Greek state
which retained the kingly form of government in
historical times. For in Sparta all state sacrifices were
offered by the kings as descendants of the god.<note place='foot'>Xenophon, <hi rend='italic'>Repub. Lac.</hi> c. 15, cp.
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> 13; Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Pol.</hi> iii. 14, 3.</note> This
combination of priestly functions with royal authority
is familiar to every one. Asia Minor, for example,
was the seat of various great religious capitals peopled
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
by thousands of <q>sacred slaves,</q> and ruled by pontiffs
who wielded at once temporal and spiritual authority,
like the popes of mediaeval Rome. Such priest-ridden
cities were Zela and Pessinus.<note place='foot'>Strabo, xii. 3, 37. 5, 3; cp. xi. 4,
7. xii. 2, 3. 2, 6. 3, 31 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> 3, 34. 8,
9. 8, 14. But see <hi rend='italic'>Encyc. Brit.</hi>, art.
<q>Priest,</q> xix. 729.</note> Teutonic kings, again,
in the old heathen days seem to have stood in the
position, and exercised the powers of high priests.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer</hi>,
p. 243.</note>
The Emperors of China offer public sacrifices, the
details of which are regulated by the ritual books.<note place='foot'>See the <hi rend='italic'>Lî-Kî</hi> (Legge's translation),
<hi rend='italic'>passim</hi>.</note> It
is needless, however, to multiply examples of what is
the rule rather than the exception in the early history
of the kingship.
</p>

<p>
But when we have said that the ancient kings were
commonly priests also, we are far from having exhausted
the religious aspect of their office. In those
days the divinity that hedges a king was no empty
form of speech but the expression of a sober belief.
Kings were revered, in many cases not merely as
priests, that is, as intercessors between man and god,
but as themselves gods, able to bestow upon their
subjects and worshippers those blessings which are
commonly supposed to be beyond the reach of man,
and are sought, if at all, only by prayer and sacrifice
offered to superhuman and invisible beings. Thus
kings are often expected to give rain and sunshine in
due season, to make the crops grow, and so on.
Strange as this expectation appears to us, it is quite
of a piece with early modes of thought. A savage
hardly conceives the distinction commonly drawn by
more advanced peoples between the natural and the
supernatural. To him the world is mostly worked
by supernatural agents, that is, by personal beings
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
acting on impulses and motives like his own, liable
like him to be moved by appeals to their pity, their
fears, and their hopes. In a world so conceived he
sees no limit to his power of influencing the course of
nature to his own advantage. Prayers, promises, or
threats may secure him fine weather and an abundant
crop from the gods; and if a god should happen, as
he sometimes believes, to become incarnate in his own
person, then he need appeal to no higher power; he,
the savage, possesses in himself all the supernatural
powers necessary to further his own well-being and
that of his fellow men.
</p>

<p>
This is one way in which the idea of a man-god
is reached. But there is another. Side by side with
the view of the world as pervaded by spiritual forces,
primitive man has another conception in which we
may detect a germ of the modern notion of natural law
or the view of nature as a series of events occurring in
an invariable order without the intervention of personal
agency. The germ of which I speak is involved in
that sympathetic magic, as it may be called, which
plays a large part in most systems of superstition.
One of the principles of sympathetic magic is that any
effect may be produced by imitating it. To take a few
instances. If it is wished to kill a person an image
of him is made and then destroyed; and it is believed
that through a certain physical sympathy between the
person and his image, the man feels the injuries done
to the image as if they were done to his own body, and
that when it is destroyed he must simultaneously perish.
Again, in Morocco a fowl or a pigeon may sometimes
be seen with a little red bundle tied to its foot. The
bundle contains a charm, and it is believed that as the
charm is kept in constant motion by the bird a corresponding
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
restlessness is kept up in the mind of him or
her against whom the charm is directed.<note place='foot'>A. Leared, <hi rend='italic'>Morocco and the Moors</hi>,
p. 272.</note> In Nias
when a wild pig has fallen into the pit prepared for it,
it is taken out and its back is rubbed with nine fallen
leaves, in the belief that this will make nine more wild
pigs fall into the pit just as the nine leaves fell from
the tree.<note place='foot'>J. W. Thomas, <q>De jacht op het
eiland Nias,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxvi.
277.</note> When a Cambodian hunter has set his nets
and taken nothing, he strips himself naked, goes some
way off, then strolls up to the net as if he did not see
it, lets himself be caught in it and cries, <q>Hillo! what's
this? I'm afraid I'm caught.</q> After that the net is
sure to catch game.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <q>Notes sur les coutumes
et croyances superstitieuses des
Cambodgiens,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Cochinchine Française,
Excursions et Reconnaissances</hi>,
No. 16, p. 157.</note> In Thüringen the man who sows
flax carries the seed in a long bag which reaches from
his shoulders to his knees, and he walks with long
strides, so that the bag sways to and fro on his back.
It is believed that this will cause the flax crop to wave
in the wind.<note place='foot'>Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi>, p. 218,
No. 36.</note> In the interior of Sumatra the rice is
sown by women who, in sowing, let their hair hang
loose down their back, in order that the rice may grow
luxuriantly and have long stalks.<note place='foot'>Van Hasselt, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbeschrijving van
Midden-Sumatra</hi>, p. 323.</note> Again, magic sympathy
is supposed to exist between a man and any
severed portion of his person, as his hair or nails; so
that whoever gets possession of hair or nails may work
his will, at any distance, upon the person from whom
they were cut. This superstition is world-wide.
Further, the sympathy in question exists between
friends and relations, especially at critical times.
Hence, for example, the elaborate code of rules which
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
regulates the conduct of persons left at home while a
party of their friends is out fishing or hunting or on
the war-path. It is thought that if the persons left at
home broke these rules their absent friends would
suffer an injury, corresponding in its nature to the
breach of the rule. Thus when a Dyak is out head-hunting,
his wife or, if he is unmarried, his sister, must
wear a sword day and night in order that he may
always be thinking of his weapons; and she may not
sleep during the day nor go to bed before two in the
morning, lest her husband or brother should thereby
be surprised in his sleep by an enemy.<note place='foot'>J. C. E. Tromp, <q>De Rambai en Sebroeang
Dajaks,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxv. 118.</note> In Laos when
an elephant hunter is setting out for the chase he warns
his wife not to cut her hair or oil her body in his
absence; for if she cut her hair the elephant would
burst the toils, if she oiled herself it would slip through
them.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notes sur le Laos</hi>,
p. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In all these cases (and similar instances might be
multiplied indefinitely) an action is performed or
avoided, because its performance is believed to entail
good or bad consequences of a sort resembling the act
itself. Sometimes the magic sympathy takes effect
not so much through an act as through a supposed
resemblance of qualities. Thus some Bechuanas wear
a ferret as a charm because, being very tenacious of
life, it will make them difficult to kill.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in South
Africa</hi> (second journey), ii. 206;
Barnabas Shaw, <hi rend='italic'>Memorials of South
Africa</hi>, p. 66.</note> Others wear a
certain insect, mutilated but living, for a similar purpose.<note place='foot'>Casalis, <hi rend='italic'>The Basutos</hi>, p. 271 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Other Bechuana warriors wear the hair of an
ox among their own hair and the skin of a frog on
their mantle, because a frog is slippery and the ox from
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
which the hair has been taken has no horns and is
therefore hard to catch; so the warrior who is provided
with these charms believes that he will be as hard to
hold as the ox and the frog.<note place='foot'>Casalis, <hi rend='italic'>The Basutos</hi>, p. 272.</note>
</p>

<p>
Thus we see that in sympathetic magic one event
is supposed to be followed necessarily and invariably
by another, without the intervention of any spiritual or
personal agency. This is, in fact, the modern conception
of physical causation; the conception, indeed, is
misapplied, but it is there none the less. Here, then,
we have another mode in which primitive man seeks to
bend nature to his wishes. There is, perhaps, hardly
a savage who does not fancy himself possessed of this
power of influencing the course of nature by sympathetic
magic; a man-god, on this view, is only an
individual who is believed to enjoy this common power
in an unusually high degree. Thus, whereas a man-god
of the former or inspired type derives his divinity
from a deity who has taken up his abode in a tabernacle
of flesh, a man-god of the latter type draws his supernatural
power from a certain physical sympathy with
nature. He is not merely the receptacle of a divine
spirit. His whole being, body and soul, is so delicately
attuned to the harmony of the world that a touch of his
hand or a turn of his head may send a thrill vibrating
through the universal framework of things; and conversely
his divine organism is acutely sensitive to such
slight changes of environment as would leave ordinary
mortals wholly unaffected. But the line between these
two types of man-god, however sharply we may draw
it in theory, is seldom to be traced with precision in
practice, and in what follows I shall not insist on it.
</p>

<p>
To readers long familiarised with the conception of
<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>
natural law, the belief of primitive man that he can rule
the elements must be so foreign that it may be well to
illustrate it by examples. When we have seen that in
early society men who make no pretence at all of being
gods do nevertheless commonly believe themselves to
be invested with supernatural powers, we shall have
the less difficulty in comprehending the extraordinary
range of powers ascribed to individuals who are actually
regarded as divine.
</p>

<p>
Of all natural phenomena there are perhaps none
which civilised man feels himself more powerless to
influence than the rain, the sun, and the wind. Yet
all these are commonly supposed by savages to be in
some degree under their control.
</p>

<p>
To begin with rain-making. In a village near
Dorpat in Russia, when rain was much wanted, three
men used to climb up the fir-trees of an old sacred
grove. One of them drummed with a hammer on a
kettle or small cask to imitate thunder; the second
knocked two fire-brands together and made the sparks
fly, to imitate lightning; and the third, who was called
<q>the rain-maker,</q> had a bunch of twigs with which he
sprinkled water from a vessel on all sides.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, p. 342, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> This is an
example of sympathetic magic; the desired event is
supposed to be produced by imitating it. Rain is often
thus made by imitation. In Halmahera (Gilolo), a
large island to the west of New Guinea, a wizard
makes rain by dipping a branch of a particular kind of
tree in water and sprinkling the ground with it.<note place='foot'>C. F. H. Campen <q>De Godsdienstbegrippen
der Halmaherasche Alfoeren,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische
Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>, xxvii. 447.</note> In
Ceram it is enough to dedicate the bark of a certain
tree to the spirits and lay it in water.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige rassen
tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, p. 114.</note> In New Britain
<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>
the rain-maker wraps some leaves of a red and green
striped creeper in a banana-leaf, moistens the bundle
with water and buries it in the ground; then he imitates
with his mouth the plashing of rain.<note place='foot'>R. Parkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Im Bismarck Archipel</hi>,
p. 143.</note> Amongst
the Omaha Indians of North America, when the corn
is withering for want of rain, the members of the sacred
Buffalo Society fill a large vessel with water and dance
four times round it. One of them drinks some of the
water and spirts it into the air, making a fine spray in
imitation of a mist or drizzling rain. Then he upsets
the vessel, spilling the water on the ground; whereupon
the dancers fall down and drink up the water,
getting mud all over their faces. Lastly they spirt the
water into the air, making a fine mist. This saves the
corn.<note place='foot'>J. Owen Dorsey, <q>Omaha Sociology,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Third Annual Report of the
Bureau of Ethnology</hi> (Washington),
p. 347. Cp. Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans
l'Amérique septentrionale</hi>, ii. 187.</note> Amongst the Australian Wotjobaluk the rain-maker
dipped a bunch of his own hair in water, sucked
out the water and squirted it westward, or he twirled
the ball round his head making a spray like rain.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
xvi. 35. Cp. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian
Aborigines</hi>, p. 98.</note>
Squirting water from the mouth is also a West African
way of making rain.<note place='foot'>Labat, <hi rend='italic'>Relation historique de l'Ethiopie
occidentale</hi>, ii. 180.</note> Another mode is to dip a
particular stone in water or sprinkle water on it. In a
Samoan village a certain stone was carefully housed as
the representative of the rain-making god; and in time
of drought his priests carried the stone in procession,
and dipped it in a stream.<note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 145.</note> In the Ta-ta-thi tribe of
New South Wales the rain-maker breaks off a piece
of quartz crystal and spits it towards the sky; the rest
of the crystal he wraps in emu feathers, soaks both
crystal and feathers in water, and carefully hides them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xiv. 362.</note>
<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>
In the Keramin tribe of New South Wales the wizard
retires to the bed of a creek, drops water on a round
flat stone, then covers up and conceals it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> Cp.
Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian Race</hi>, ii. 377.</note> The
Fountain of Baranton, of romantic fame, in the forest
of Brécilien, used to be resorted to by peasants when
they needed rain; they caught some of the water in a
tankard and threw it on a slab near the spring.<note place='foot'>Rhys, <hi rend='italic'>Celtic Heathendom</hi>, p. 184;
Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 494.
Cp. San-Marte, <hi rend='italic'>Die Arthur Sage</hi>, pp.
105 sq., 153 sqq.</note> When
some of the Apache Indians wish for rain, they take
water from a certain spring and throw it on a particular
point high up on a rock; the clouds then soon gather
and rain begins to fall.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The American Antiquarian</hi>, viii.
339.</note> There is a lonely tarn on
Snowdon called Dulyn or the Black Lake, lying <q>in a
dismal dingle surrounded by high and dangerous rocks.</q>
A row of stepping stones runs out into the lake; and
if any one steps on the stones and throws water so as
to wet the farthest stone, which is called the Red
Altar, <q>it is but a chance that you do not get rain
before night, even when it is hot weather.</q><note place='foot'>Rhys, <hi rend='italic'>Celtic Heathendom</hi>, p. 185 sq.</note> In these
cases it is probable that, as in Samoa, the stone is
regarded as in some sort divine. This appears from
the custom sometimes observed of dipping the cross in
the Fountain of Baranton, to procure rain; for this is
plainly a substitute for the older way of throwing the
water on the stone.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 187. So at the fountain of
Sainte Anne, near Gevezé, in Brittany.
Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions et Superstitions de
la Haute Bretagne</hi>, i. 72.</note> In Mingrelia, to get rain they
dip a holy image in water daily till it rains.<note place='foot'>Lamberti, <q>Relation de la Colchide
ou Mingrélie,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Voyages au Nord</hi>,
vii. 174 (Amsterdam, 1725).</note> In
Navarre the image of St. Peter was taken to a river,
where some prayed to him for rain, but others called
out to duck him in the water.<note place='foot'>Le Brun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire critique des
pratiques superstitieuses</hi> (Amsterdam,
1733), i. 245 sq.</note> Here the dipping in
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
the water is used as a threat; but originally it was
probably a sympathetic charm, as in the following
instance. In New Caledonia the rain-makers blackened
themselves all over, dug up a dead body, took the bones
to a cave, jointed them, and hung the skeleton over
some taro leaves. Water was poured over the skeleton
to run down on the leaves. <q>They supposed that the
soul of the departed took up the water, made rain of
it, and showered it down again.</q><note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 345 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The same motive
comes clearly out in a mode of making rain which is
practised by various peoples of South Eastern Europe.
In time of drought the Servians strip a girl, clothe her
from head to foot in grass, herbs, and flowers, even her
face being hidden with them. Thus disguised she is
called the Dodola, and goes through the village with a
troop of girls. They stop before every house; the
Dodola dances, while the other girls form a ring round
her singing one of the Dodola songs, and the housewife
pours a pail of water over her.
</p>

<p>
One of the songs they sing runs thus&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>We go through the village;</q></l>
<l>The clouds go in the sky;</l>
<l>We go faster,</l>
<l>Faster go the clouds;</l>
<l>They have overtaken us,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And wetted the corn and the vine.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
A similar custom is observed by the Greeks, Bulgarians,
and Roumanians.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 329
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Grimm, D. M.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 493 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W.
Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Das Jahr und seine Tage in
Meinung und Brauch der Romänen
Siebenbürgens</hi>, p. 17; E. Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>The
Land beyond the Forest</hi>, ii. 13.</note> In such customs the leaf-dressed
girl represents the spirit of vegetation, and
drenching her with water is an imitation of rain. In
Russia, in the Government of Kursk, when rain is
much wanted, the women seize a passing stranger and
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
throw him into the river, or souse him from head to
foot.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 331.</note> Later on we shall see that a passing stranger is
often, as here, taken for a god or spirit. Amongst the
Minahassa of North Celebes the priest bathes as a rain-charm.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <q>De Minahasa
in 1825,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift v. Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde</hi>, xviii. 524.</note>
In the Caucasian Province of Georgia, when
a drought has lasted long, marriageable girls are yoked
in couples with an ox-yoke on their shoulders, a priest
holds the reins, and thus harnessed they wade through
rivers, puddles, and marshes, praying, screaming, weeping,
and laughing.<note place='foot'>J. Reinegg, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung des Kaukasus</hi>,
ii. 114.</note> In a district of Transylvania,
when the ground is parched with drought, some girls
strip themselves naked, and, led by an older woman,
who is also naked, they steal a harrow and carry it
across the field to a brook, where they set it afloat.
Next they sit on the harrow and keep a tiny flame
burning on each corner of it for an hour. Then they
leave the harrow in the water and go home.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 553; Gerard,
<hi rend='italic'>The Land beyond the Forest</hi>, ii. 40.</note> A similar
rain-charm is resorted to in India; naked women drag
a plough across the field by night.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, iii. Nos.
173, 513.</note> It is not said that
they plunge the plough into a stream or sprinkle it with
water. But the charm would hardly be complete
without it.
</p>

<p>
Sometimes the charm works through an animal.
To procure rain the Peruvians used to set a black
sheep in a field, poured <foreign rend='italic'>chica</foreign> over it, and gave it
nothing to eat till rain fell.<note place='foot'>Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Indies</hi>, bk.
v. ch. 28.</note> In a district of Sumatra
all the women of the village, scantily clad, go to the
river, wade into it, and splash each other with the water.
A black cat is thrown into the water and made to
swim about for a while, then allowed to escape to the
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
bank, pursued by the splashing of the women.<note place='foot'>A. L. van Hasselt, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbeschrijving
van Midden-Sumatra</hi>, p. 320 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
these cases the colour of the animal is part of the charm;
being black it will darken the sky with rain-clouds.
So the Bechuanas burn the stomach of an ox at evening,
because they say, <q>the black smoke will gather the
clouds, and cause the rain to come.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>South African Folk-lore Journal</hi>,
i. 34.</note> The Timorese
sacrifice a black pig for rain, a white or red one for
sunshine.<note place='foot'>J. S. G. Gramberg, <q>Eene maand
in de binnenlanden van Timor,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van het Bataviansch
Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</hi>,
xxxvi. 209.</note> The Garos offer a black goat on the top of
a very high mountain in time of drought.<note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of Bengal</hi>, p. 88.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes people try to coerce the rain-god into
giving rain. In China a huge dragon made of paper
or wood, representing the rain-god, is carried about in
procession; but if no rain follows, it is cursed and torn
in pieces.<note place='foot'>Huc, <hi rend='italic'>L'empire chinois</hi>, i. 241.</note> In the like circumstances the Feloupes of
Senegambia throw down their fetishes and drag them
about the fields, cursing them till rain falls.<note place='foot'>Bérenger-Féraud, <hi rend='italic'>Les peuplades de
la Sénégambie</hi>, p. 291.</note> Some
Indians of the Orinoco worshipped toads and kept
them in vessels in order to obtain from them rain or
sunshine as might be required; when their prayers
were not answered they beat the toads.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Colombia, being a geographical etc.
account of that country</hi>, i. 642 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Culturlander des alten
Amerika</hi>, ii. 216.</note> Killing a
frog is a European rain-charm.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Gebräuche und
Märchen aus Westfalen</hi>, ii. p. 80;
Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>The Land beyond the Forest</hi>, ii.
13.</note> When the spirits
withhold rain or sunshine, the Comanches whip a
slave; if the gods prove obstinate, the victim is almost
flayed alive.<note place='foot'>Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the
Pacific States</hi>, i. 520.</note> Here the human being may represent
the god, like the leaf-clad Dodola. When the rice-crop
is endangered by long drought, the governor of
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
Battambang, a province of Siam, goes in great state to
a certain pagoda and prays to Buddha for rain. Then
accompanied by his suite and followed by an enormous
crowd he adjourns to a plain behind the pagoda.
Here a dummy figure has been made up, dressed in
bright colours, and placed in the middle of the plain.
A wild music begins to play; maddened by the din of
drums and cymbals and crackers, and goaded on by
their drivers, the elephants charge down on the
dummy and trample it to pieces. After this, Buddha
will soon give rain.<note place='foot'>Brien, <q>Aperçu sur la province de
Battambang,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Cochinchine française,
Excursions et Reconnaissances</hi>, No. 25,
p. 6 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Another way of constraining the rain-god is to disturb
him in his haunts. This seems the reason why
rain is supposed to be the consequence of troubling a
sacred spring. The Dards believe that if a cowskin
or anything impure is placed in certain springs, storms
will follow.<note place='foot'>Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of the Hindoo
Koosh</hi>, p. 95.</note> Gervasius mentions a spring into which
if a stone or a stick were thrown, rain would at once
issue from it and drench the thrower.<note place='foot'>Gervasius von Tilburg, ed. Liebrecht,
p. 41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> There was a
fountain in Munster such that if it were touched or
even looked at by a human being, it would at once
flood the whole province with rain.<note place='foot'>Giraldus Cambrensis, <hi rend='italic'>Topography
of Ireland</hi>, ch. 7. Cp. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 341 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> Sometimes an
appeal is made to the pity of the gods. When their
corn is being burnt up by the sun, the Zulus look out
for a <q>heaven-bird,</q> kill it, and throw it into a pool.
Then the heaven melts with tenderness for the death
of the bird; <q>it wails for it by raining, wailing a
funeral wail.</q><note place='foot'>Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>Religious System of the
Amazulu</hi>, p. 407 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In times of drought the Guanches of
Teneriffe led their sheep to sacred ground, and there
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
they separated the lambs from their dams, that their
plaintive bleating might touch the heart of the god.<note place='foot'>Reclus, <hi rend='italic'>Nouvelle Géographie Universelle</hi>,
xii. 100.</note>
A peculiar mode of making rain was adopted by the
heathen Arabs. They tied two sorts of bushes to the
tails and hind-legs of their cattle, and setting fire to
the bushes drove the cattle to the top of a mountain,
praying for rain.<note place='foot'>Rasmussen, <hi rend='italic'>Additamenta ad historiam
Arabum ante Islamismum</hi>, p. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This may be, as Wellhausen suggests,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Reste arabischen Heidentumes</hi>, p.
157.</note>
an imitation of lightning on the horizon. But
it may also be a way of threatening the sky; as some
West African rain-makers put a pot of inflammable
materials on the fire and blow up the flames, threatening
that if heaven does not soon give rain they will
send up a flame which will set the sky on fire.<note place='foot'>Labat, <hi rend='italic'>Relation historique de
l'Ethiopie occidentale</hi>, ii. 180.</note> The
Dieyerie of South Australia have a way of their own
of making rain. A hole is dug about twelve feet long
and eight or ten broad, and over this hole a hut of
logs and branches is made. Two men, supposed to
have received a special inspiration from Mooramoora
(the Good Spirit), are bled by an old and influential
man with a sharp flint inside the arm; the blood is
made to flow on the other men of the tribe who sit
huddled together. At the same time the two bleeding
men throw handfuls of down, some of which adheres
to the blood, while the rest floats in the air. The
blood is thought to represent the rain, and the down
the clouds. During the ceremony two large stones
are placed in the middle of the hut; they stand for
gathering clouds and presage rain. Then the men
who were bled carry away the stones for about fifteen
miles and place them as high as they can in the tallest
tree. Meanwhile, the other men gather gypsum, pound
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
it fine, and throw it into a water-hole. This the Mooramoora
is supposed to see, and at once he causes the
clouds to appear in the sky. Lastly, the men surround
the hut, butt at it with their heads, force their way in,
and reappear on the other side, repeating this till the
hut is wrecked. In doing this they are forbidden to
use their hands or arms; but when the heavy logs
alone remain, they are allowed to pull them out with
their hands. <q>The piercing of the hut with their
heads symbolises the piercing of the clouds; the fall
of the hut, the fall of rain.</q><note place='foot'>S. Gason, <q>The Dieyerie tribe,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of S. Australia</hi>, p. 276 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Another Australian
mode of rain-making is to burn human hair.<note place='foot'>W. Stanbridge, <q>On the Aborigines
of Victoria,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Trans. Ethnol. Soc. of
London</hi>, i. 300.</note>
</p>

<p>
Like other peoples the Greeks and Romans sought
to procure rain by magic, when prayers and processions<note place='foot'>Marcus Antoninus, v. 7; Petronius,
44; Tertullian, <hi rend='italic'>Apolog.</hi> 40; cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> 22
and 23.</note>
had proved ineffectual. For example, in Arcadia,
when the corn and trees were parched with drought,
the priest of Zeus dipped an oak branch into a certain
spring on Mount Lycaeus. Thus troubled, the water
sent up a misty cloud, from which rain soon fell upon
the land.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, viii. 38, 4.</note> A similar mode of making rain is still
practised, as we have seen, in Halmahera near New
Guinea. The people of Crannon in Thessaly had a
bronze chariot which they kept in a temple. When
they desired a shower they shook the chariot and the
shower fell.<note place='foot'>Antigonus, <hi rend='italic'>Histor. Mirab.</hi> 15
(<hi rend='italic'>Script. mirab. Graeci</hi>, ed. Westermann,
p. 65).</note> Probably the rattling of the chariot was
meant to imitate thunder; we have already seen that
in Russia mock thunder and lightning form part of
a rain-charm. The mythical Salmoneus of Thessaly
made mock thunder by dragging bronze kettles behind
his chariot or by driving over a bronze bridge, while
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
he hurled blazing torches in imitation of lightning. It
was his impious wish to mimic the thundering car of
Zeus as it rolled across the vault of heaven.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Bibl.</hi> i. 9, 7; Virgil,
<hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> vi. 585 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Near a
temple of Mars, outside the walls of Rome, there was
kept a certain stone known as the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>lapis manalis</foreign>. In
time of drought the stone was dragged into Rome and
this was supposed to bring down rain immediately.<note place='foot'>Festus, <hi rend='italic'>svv.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>aquaelicium and
manalem lapidem</hi>, pp. 2, 128, ed.
Müller; Nonius Marcellus, <hi rend='italic'>sv.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>trullum</hi>,
p. 637, ed. Quicherat; Servius on
Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iii. 175; Fulgentius,
<hi rend='italic'>Expos. serm. antiq.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>sv.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>manales lapides,
Mythogr. Lat.</hi> ed. Staveren, p. 769 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
There were Etruscan wizards who made rain or discovered
springs of water, it is not certain which.
They were thought to bring the rain or the water out
of their bellies.<note place='foot'>Nonius Marcellus, <hi rend='italic'>sv.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>aquilex</hi>, p.
69, ed. Quicherat. In favour of taking
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>aquilex</foreign> as rain-maker is the use of
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>aquaelicium</foreign> in the sense of rain-making.
Cp. K. O. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Die Etrusker</hi>, ed.
W. Deecke, ii. 318 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The legendary Telchines in Rhodes
are described as magicians who could change their
shape and bring clouds, rain, and snow.<note place='foot'>Diodorus, v. 55.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, primitive man fancies he can make the sun
to shine, and can hasten or stay its going down. At
an eclipse the Ojebways used to think that the sun was
being extinguished. So they shot fire-tipped arrows
in the air, hoping thus to rekindle his expiring light.<note place='foot'>Peter Jones, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Ojebway
Indians</hi>, p. 84.</note>
Conversely during an eclipse of the moon some Indian
tribes of the Orinoco used to bury lighted brands in
the ground; because, said they, if the moon were to
be extinguished, all fire on earth would be extinguished
with her, except such as was hidden from her sight.<note place='foot'>Gumilla, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de l'Orénoque</hi>, iii.
243 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In New Caledonia when a wizard desires to make
sunshine, he takes some plants and corals to the burial-ground,
and makes them into a bundle, adding two
locks of hair cut from a living child (his own child if
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
possible), also two teeth or an entire jawbone from
the skeleton of an ancestor. He then climbs a high
mountain whose top catches the first rays of the
morning sun. Here he deposits three sorts of plants
on a flat stone, places a branch of dry coral beside
them, and hangs the bundle of charms over the stone.
Next morning he returns to this rude altar, and at the
moment when the sun rises from the sea he kindles a
fire on the altar. As the smoke rises, he rubs the
stone with the dry coral, invokes his ancestors and
says: <q>Sun! I do this that you may be burning hot,
and eat up all the clouds in the sky.</q> The same
ceremony is repeated at sunset.<note place='foot'>Glaumont, <q>Usages, mœurs et
coutumes des Néo-Calédoniens,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Revue d' Ethnographie</hi>, vi. 116.</note> When the sun rises
behind clouds&mdash;a rare event in the bright sky of
Southern Africa&mdash;the Sun clan of the Bechuanas say
that he is grieving their heart. All work stands still,
and all the food of the previous day is given to matrons
or old women. They may eat it and may share it with
the children they are nursing, but no one else may
taste it. The people go down to the river and wash
themselves all over. Each man throws into the river
a stone taken from his domestic hearth, and replaces it
with one picked up in the bed of the river. On their
return to the village the chief kindles a fire in his hut,
and all his subjects come and get a light from it. A
general dance follows.<note place='foot'>Arbousset et Daumas, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage
d'exploration au Nord-est de la Colonie
du Cap de Bonne-Espérance</hi>, p. 350 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
For the kinship with the sacred object
(tchem) from which the clan takes its
name, see <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> pp. 350, 422, 424.
Other people have claimed kindred
with the sun, as the Natchez of North
America (<hi rend='italic'>Voyages au Nord</hi>, v. 24) and
the Incas of Peru.</note> In these cases it seems that
the lighting of the flame on earth is supposed to
rekindle the solar fire. Such a belief comes naturally
to people who, like the Sun clan of the Bechuanas,
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
deem themselves the veritable kinsmen of the sun.
The Melanesians make sunshine by means of a mock
sun. A round stone is wound about with red braid
and stuck with owl's feathers to represent rays; it is
then hung on a high tree. Or the stone is laid on the
ground with white rods radiating from it to imitate
sunbeams.<note place='foot'>Codrington, in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop.
Instit.</hi> x. 278.</note> Sometimes the mode of making sunshine
is the converse of that of making rain. Thus we have
seen that a white or red pig is sacrificed for sunshine,
as a black one is sacrificed for rain.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>.</note> Some of the
New Caledonians drench a skeleton to make rain, but
burn it to make sunshine.<note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 346. See above,
p. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
In a pass of the Peruvian Andes stand two ruined
towers on opposite hills. Iron hooks are clamped into
their walls for the purpose of stretching a net from
one tower to the other. The net is intended to catch
the sun.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, iv. 174. The name of the
place is Andahuayllas.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the top of a small hill in Fiji grew a patch of
reeds, and travellers who feared to be belated used to
tie the tops of a handful of reeds together to detain
the sun from going down.<note place='foot'>Th. Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Fiji and the Fijians</hi>,
i. 250.</note> The intention perhaps
was to entangle the sun in the reeds, just as the
Peruvians try to catch him in the net. Stories of men
who have caught the sun in a noose are widely spread.<note place='foot'>Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>The American Indians</hi>,
p. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Songs of the
South Pacific</hi>, p. 61 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>,
p. 200 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Jerome of Prague, travelling among the heathen
Lithuanians early in the fifteenth century, found a tribe
who worshipped the sun and venerated a large iron
hammer. The priests told him that once the sun had
been invisible for several months, because a powerful
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
king had shut it up in a strong tower; but the signs
of the zodiac had broken open the tower with this very
hammer and released the sun. Therefore they adored
the hammer.<note place='foot'>Aeneas Sylvius, <hi rend='italic'>Opera</hi> (Bâle, 1571),
p. 418.</note> When an Australian blackfellow wishes
to stay the sun from going down till he gets home, he
places a sod in the fork of a tree, exactly facing the
setting sun.<note place='foot'>Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of
Victoria</hi>, ii. 334; Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian
Race</hi>, i. 50.</note> For the same purpose an Indian of
Yucatan, journeying westward, places a stone in a tree
or pulls out some of his eyelashes and blows them
towards the sun.<note place='foot'>Fancourt, <hi rend='italic'>History of Yucatan</hi>, p. 118.</note> South African natives, in travelling,
will put a stone in a branch of a tree or place some
grass on the path with a stone over it, believing that
this will cause their friends to keep the meal waiting
till their arrival.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>South African Folk-lore Journal</hi>,
i. 34.</note> In these, as in previous examples,
the purpose apparently is to retard the sun. But why
should the act of putting a stone or a sod in a tree be
supposed to effect this? A partial explanation is
suggested by another Australian custom. In their
journeys the natives are accustomed to place stones in
trees at different heights from the ground in order to
indicate the height of the sun in the sky at the moment
when they passed the particular tree. Those who
follow are thus made aware of the time of day when
their friends in advance passed the spot.<note place='foot'>E. J. Eyre, <hi rend='italic'>Journals of Expeditions
of Discovery into Central Australia</hi>,
ii. 365.</note> Possibly
the natives, thus accustomed to mark the sun's progress,
may have slipped into the confusion of imagining that
to mark the sun's progress was to arrest it at the point
marked. On the other hand, to make it go down
faster, the Australians throw sand into the air and
blow with their mouths towards the sun.<note place='foot'>Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian Race</hi>, iii. 145.</note>
</p>

<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>

<p>
Once more, the savage thinks he can make the
wind to blow or to be still. When the day is hot and
a Yakut has a long way to go, he takes a stone which
he has chanced to find in an animal or fish, winds a
horse-hair several times round it, and ties it to a stick.
He then waves the stick about, uttering a spell. Soon
a cool breeze begins to blow.<note place='foot'>Gmelin, <hi rend='italic'>Reise durch Sibirien</hi>, ii.
510.</note> The Wind clan of the
Omahas flap their blankets to start a breeze which will
drive away the mosquitoes.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Third Annual Report of the Bureau
of Ethnology</hi> (Washington), p. 241.</note> When a Haida Indian
wishes to obtain a fair wind, he fasts, shoots a raven,
singes it in the fire, and then going to the edge of the
sea sweeps it over the surface of the water four times
in the direction in which he wishes the wind to blow.
He then throws the raven behind him, but afterwards
picks it up and sets it in a sitting posture at the foot
of a spruce-tree, facing towards the required wind.
Propping its beak open with a stick, he requests a fair
wind for a certain number of days; then going away
he lies covered up in his mantle till another Indian
asks him for how many days he has desired the wind,
which question he answers.<note place='foot'>G. M. Dawson, <q>On the Haida
Indians of the Queen Charlotte Islands,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Geological Survey of Canada, Report of
progress for 1878-1879</hi>, p. 124 B.</note> When a sorcerer in New
Britain wishes to make a wind blow in a certain
direction, he throws burnt lime in the air, chanting
a song all the time. Then he waves sprigs of ginger
and other plants about, throws them up and catches
them. Next he makes a small fire with these sprigs
on the spot where the lime has fallen thickest, and
walks round the fire chanting. Lastly, he takes the
ashes and throws them on the water.<note place='foot'>W. Powell, <hi rend='italic'>Wanderings in a Wild
Country</hi>, p. 169.</note> On the altar of
Fladda's chapel, in the island of Fladdahuan (one of
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
the Hebrides), lay a round bluish stone which was
always moist. Windbound fishermen walked sunwise
round the chapel and then poured water on the stone,
whereupon a favourable breeze was sure to spring up.<note place='foot'>Miss C. F. Gordon Cumming, <hi rend='italic'>In
the Hebrides</hi>, p. 166 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Martin, <q>Description
of the Western Islands of
Scotland,</q> in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and
Travels</hi>, iii. 627.</note>
In Finnland wizards used to sell wind to storm-staid
mariners. The wind was enclosed in three knots; if
they undid the first knot, a moderate wind sprang up;
if the second, it blew half a gale; if the third, a hurricane.<note place='foot'>Olaus Magnus, <hi rend='italic'>Gentium Septentr.
Hist.</hi> iii. 15.</note>
The same thing is said to have been done by
wizards and witches in Lappland, in the island of
Lewis, and in the Isle of Man.<note place='foot'>Scheffer, <hi rend='italic'>Lapponia</hi>, p. 144; Gordon
Cumming, <hi rend='italic'>In the Hebrides</hi>, p. 254 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Train, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the Isle of Man</hi>, ii.
166.</note> A Norwegian witch
has boasted of sinking a ship by opening a bag in
which she had shut up a wind.<note place='foot'>C. Leemius, <hi rend='italic'>De Lapponibus Finmarchiae
etc. commentatio</hi>, p. 454.</note> Ulysses received the
winds in a leather bag from Aeolus, King of the
Winds.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi>, x. 19 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> So Perdoytus, the Lithuanian wind-god,
keeps the winds enclosed in a leather bag; when they
escape from it he pursues them, beats them, and shuts
them up again.<note place='foot'>E. Veckenstedt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Mythen,
Sagen, und Legenden der Zamaiten
(Litauer)</hi>, i. 153.</note> The Motumotu in New Guinea think
that storms are sent by an Oiabu sorcerer; for each
wind he has a bamboo which he opens at pleasure.<note place='foot'>J. Chalmers, <hi rend='italic'>Pioneering in New
Guinea</hi>, p. 177.</note>
But here we have passed from custom (with which
alone we are at present concerned) into mythology.
Shetland seamen still buy winds from old women who
claim to rule the storms. There are now in Lerwick
old women who live by selling wind.<note place='foot'>Rogers, <hi rend='italic'>Social Life in Scotland</hi>, iii.
220; Sir W. Scott, <hi rend='italic'>Pirate</hi>, note to ch.
vii.; Shaks. <hi rend='italic'>Macbeth</hi>, Act i. Sc. 3, l. 11.</note> When the
Hottentots wish to make the wind drop, they take one
of their fattest skins and hang it on the end of a pole,
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
believing that by blowing the skin down the wind will
lose all its force and must itself fall.<note place='foot'>Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>
(Amsterdam, 1686), p. 389.</note> In some parts
of Austria, during a heavy storm, it is customary to
open the window and throw out a handful of meal,
chaff, or feathers, saying to the wind, <q>There, that's
for you, stop!</q><note place='foot'>A. Peter, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Oesterreichisch Schlesien</hi>, ii. 259.</note> Once when north-westerly winds
had kept the ice long on the coast, and food was
getting scarce, the Eskimos of Alaska performed a
ceremony to make a calm. A fire was kindled on the
shore and the men gathered round it and chanted.
An old man then stepped up to the fire and in a
coaxing voice invited the demon of the wind to come
under the fire and warm himself. When he was
supposed to have arrived, a vessel of water, to which
each man present had contributed, was thrown on
the fire by an old man, and immediately a flight of
arrows sped towards the spot where the fire had been.
They thought that the demon would not stay where he
had been so badly treated. To complete the effect,
guns were discharged in various directions, and the
captain of a European vessel was asked to fire on the
wind with cannon.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Arctic Papers for the Expedition
of 1875</hi> (R. Geogr. Soc.), p. 274.</note> When the wind blows down their
huts, the Payaguas in South America snatch up firebrands
and run against the wind menacing it with
the blazing brands, while others beat the air with their
fists to frighten the storm.<note place='foot'>Azara, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages dans l'Amérique
Méridionale</hi>, ii. 137.</note> When the Guaycurus are
threatened by a severe storm the men go out armed,
and the women and children scream their loudest to
intimidate the demon.<note place='foot'>Charlevoix, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire du Paraguay</hi>,
i. 74.</note> During a tempest the inhabitants
of a Batta village in Sumatra have been seen to
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
rush from their houses armed with sword and lance.
The Raja placed himself at their head, and with shouts
and yells they hewed and hacked at the invisible
foe. An old woman was observed to be especially
active in defending her house, slashing the air right
and left with a long sabre.<note place='foot'>W. A. Henry, <q>Bijdrage tot de
Kennis der Bataklanden,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde</hi>, xvii. 23 sq.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the light of these examples a story told by
Herodotus, which his modern critics have treated as a
fable, is perfectly credible. He says, without however
vouching for the truth of the tale, that once in the land
of the Psylli, the modern Tripoli, the wind blowing
from the Sahara had dried up all the water-tanks. So
the people took counsel and marched in a body to
make war on the south wind. But when they entered
the desert, the simoom swept down on them and
buried them to a man.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, iv. 173; Aulus Gellius,
xvi. 11.</note> The story may well have
been told by one who watched them disappearing, in
battle array, with drums and cymbals beating, into the
red cloud of whirling sand. It is still said of the
Bedouins of Eastern Africa that <q>no whirlwind ever
sweeps across the path without being pursued by a
dozen savages with drawn creeses, who stab into the
centre of the dusty column in order to drive away the
evil spirit that is believed to be riding on the blast.</q><note place='foot'>Harris, <hi rend='italic'>Highlands of Ethiopia</hi>, i.
352.</note>
So in Australia the huge columns of red sand that
move rapidly across a desert tract are thought by the
blackfellows to be spirits passing along. Once an
athletic young black ran after one of these moving
columns to kill it with boomerangs. He was away two
or three hours and came back very weary, saying he
had killed Koochee (the demon), but that Koochee
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
had growled at him and he must die.<note place='foot'>Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of
Victoria</hi>, i. 457 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> ii. 270;
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xiii. p. 194 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> Even where
these dust columns are not attacked they are still
regarded with awe. In some parts of India they are
supposed to be <foreign rend='italic'>bhuts</foreign> going to bathe in the Ganges.<note place='foot'>Denzil C. J. Ibbetson, <hi rend='italic'>Settlement
Report of the Panipat Tahsil and Karnal
Parganah of the Karnal District</hi>, p. 154.</note>
Californian Indians think that they are happy souls
ascending to the heavenly land.<note place='foot'>Stephen Powers, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of California</hi>,
p. 328.</note>
</p>

<p>
When a gust lifts the hay in the meadow, the
Breton peasant throws a knife or a fork at it to prevent
the devil from carrying off the hay.<note place='foot'>Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes populaires de
la Haute-Bretagne</hi>, p. 302 sq.</note> German peasants
throw a knife or a hat at a whirlwind because there is
a witch or a wizard in it.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 85.</note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Incarnate gods.'/>
<head>§ 3.&mdash;Incarnate gods.</head>

<p>
These examples, drawn from the beliefs and
practices of rude peoples all over the world, may
suffice to prove that the savage, whether European or
otherwise, fails to recognise those limitations to his
power over nature which seem so obvious to us. In a
society where every man is supposed to be endowed
more or less with powers which we should call supernatural,
it is plain that the distinction between gods
and men is somewhat blurred, or rather has scarcely
emerged. The conception of gods as supernatural
beings entirely distinct from and superior to man,
and wielding powers to which he possesses nothing
comparable in degree and hardly even in kind, has
been slowly evolved in the course of history. At first
the supernatural agents are not regarded as greatly, if
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
at all, superior to man; for they may be frightened
and coerced by him into doing his will. At this stage
of thought the world is viewed as a great democracy;
all beings in it, whether natural or supernatural, are
supposed to stand on a footing of tolerable equality.
But with the growth of his knowledge man learns to
realise more clearly the vastness of nature and his
own littleness and feebleness in presence of it. The
recognition of his own helplessness does not, however,
carry with it a corresponding belief in the impotence
of those supernatural beings with which his imagination
peoples the universe. On the contrary it enhances his
conception of their power. For the idea of the world
as a system of impersonal forces acting in accordance
with fixed and invariable laws has not yet fully dawned
or darkened upon him. The germ of the idea he
certainly has, and he acts upon it, not only in magic
art, but in much of the business of daily life. But the
idea remains undeveloped, and so far as he attempts
consciously to explain the world he lives in, he pictures
it as the manifestation of conscious will and personal
agency. If then he feels himself to be so frail and
slight, how vast and powerful must he deem the beings
who control the gigantic machinery of nature! Thus
as his old sense of equality with the gods slowly
vanishes, he resigns at the same time the hope of
directing the course of nature by his own unaided
resources, that is, by magic, and looks more and more
to the gods as the sole repositories of those supernatural
powers which he once claimed to share with them.
With the first advance of knowledge, therefore, prayer
and sacrifice assume the leading place in religious
ritual; and magic, which once ranked with them as a
legitimate equal, is gradually relegated to the background
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
and sinks to the level of a black art. It is now
regarded as an encroachment, at once vain and impious,
on the domain of the gods, and as such encounters the
steady opposition of the priests, whose reputation and
influence gain or lose with those of their gods. Hence,
when at a late period the distinction between religion
and superstition has emerged, we find that sacrifice and
prayer are the resource of the pious and enlightened
portion of the community, while magic is the refuge of
the superstitious and ignorant. But when, still later,
the conception of the elemental forces as personal
agents is giving way to the recognition of natural law;
then magic, based as it implicitly is on the idea of a
necessary and invariable sequence of cause and effect,
independent of personal will, reappears from the
obscurity and discredit into which it had fallen, and by
investigating the causal sequences in nature, directly
prepares the way for science. Alchemy leads up to
chemistry.
</p>

<p>
The notion of a man-god or of a human being
endowed with divine or supernatural powers, belongs
essentially to that earlier period of religious history in
which gods and men are still viewed as beings of
much the same order, and before they are divided by
the impassable gulf which, to later thought, opens out
between them. Strange, therefore, as may seem to us
the idea of a god incarnate in human form, it has
nothing very startling for early man, who sees in a
man-god or a god-man only a higher degree of the
same supernatural powers which he arrogates in
perfect good faith to himself. Such incarnate gods
are common in rude society. The incarnation may
be temporary or permanent. In the former case, the
incarnation&mdash;commonly known as inspiration or possession&mdash;reveals
<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>
itself in supernatural knowledge
rather than in supernatural power. In other words,
its usual manifestations are divination and prophesy
rather than miracles. On the other hand, when the
incarnation is not merely temporary, when the divine
spirit has permanently taken up its abode in a human
body, the god-man is usually expected to vindicate his
character by working miracles. Only we have to
remember that by men at this stage of thought
miracles are not considered as breaches of natural
law. Not conceiving the existence of natural law,
primitive man cannot conceive a breach of it. A
miracle is to him merely an unusually striking manifestation
of a common power.
</p>

<p>
The belief in temporary incarnation or inspiration
is world-wide. Certain persons are supposed to be
possessed from time to time by a spirit or deity;
while the possession lasts, their own personality lies
in abeyance, the presence of the spirit is revealed by
convulsive shiverings and shakings of the man's whole
body, by wild gestures and excited looks, all of which
are referred, not to the man himself, but to the spirit
which has entered into him; and in this abnormal state
all his utterances are accepted as the voice of the god
or spirit dwelling in him and speaking through him. In
Mangaia the priests in whom the gods took up their
abode from time to time were called <q>god-boxes</q> or,
for shortness, <q>gods.</q> Before giving oracles as gods,
they drank an intoxicating liquor, and in the frenzy
thus produced their wild words were received as the
voice of the god.<note place='foot'>Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Songs of the South Pacific</hi>, p. 35.</note> But examples of such temporary
inspiration are so common in every part of the world
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
and are now so familiar through books on ethnology,
that it is needless to cite illustrations of the general
principle.<note place='foot'>See for examples E. B. Tylor,
<hi rend='italic'>Primitive Culture</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> ii. 131 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> It may be well, however, to refer to two
particular modes of producing temporary inspiration,
because they are perhaps less known than some others,
and because we shall have occasion to refer to them
later on. One of these modes of producing inspiration
is by sucking the fresh blood of a sacrificed victim. In
the temple of Apollo Diradiotes at Argos, a lamb was
sacrificed by night once a month; a woman, who had
to observe a rule of chastity, tasted the blood of the
lamb, and thus being inspired by the god she
prophesied or divined.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ii. 24, 1. κάτοχος ἐκ
τοῦ θεοῦ γίνεται is the expression.</note> At Aegira in Achaea the
priestess of Earth drank the fresh blood of a bull
before she descended into the cave to prophesy.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxviii. 147.
Pausanias (vii. 25, 13) mentions the
draught of bull's blood as an ordeal to
test the chastity of the priestess. Doubtless
it was thought to serve both
purposes.</note> In
Southern India a devil-dancer <q>drinks the blood of
the sacrifice, putting the throat of the decapitated goat
to his mouth. Then, as if he had acquired new life,
he begins to brandish his staff of bells, and to dance
with a quick but wild unsteady step. Suddenly the
afflatus descends. There is no mistaking that glare,
or those frantic leaps. He snorts, he stares, he
gyrates. The demon has now taken bodily possession
of him; and, though he retains the power of utterance
and of motion, both are under the demon's control,
and his separate consciousness is in abeyance....
The devil-dancer is now worshipped as a present
deity, and every bystander consults him respecting his
disease, his wants, the welfare of his absent relatives,
the offerings to be made for the accomplishment of his
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
wishes, and, in short, respecting everything for which
superhuman knowledge is supposed to be available.</q><note place='foot'>Caldwell, <q>On demonolatry in
Southern India,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the
Anthropological Society of Bombay</hi>, i.
101 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
At a festival of the Minahassa in northern Celebes,
after a pig has been killed, the priest rushes furiously
at it, thrusts his head into the carcass and drinks of
the blood. Then he is dragged away from it by force
and set on a chair, whereupon he begins to prophesy
how the rice crop will turn out that year. A second
time he runs at the carcass and drinks of the blood; a
second time he is forced into the chair and continues
his predictions. It is thought there is a spirit in him
which possesses the power of prophecy.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <q>De Minahasa
in 1825,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift v. Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde</hi>, xviii. 517 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Cp. N. Graafland, <hi rend='italic'>De Minahassa</hi>, i.
122; Dumont D'Urville, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage autour
du Monde et à la recherche de La Perouse</hi>,
v. 443.</note> At Rhetra,
a great religious capital of the Western Slavs, the
priest tasted the blood of the sacrificed oxen and sheep
in order the better to prophesy.<note place='foot'>F. J. Mone, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Heidenthums
im nördlichen Europa</hi>, i. 188.</note> The true test of a
Dainyal or diviner among some of the Hindoo Koosh
tribes is to suck the blood from the neck of a decapitated
goat.<note place='foot'>Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of the Hindoo
Koosh</hi>, p. 96. For other instances of
priests or representatives of the deity
drinking the warm blood of the victim,
cp. <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift v. Nederlandsch Indië</hi>,
1849, p. 395; Oldfield, <hi rend='italic'>Sketches from
Nipal</hi>, ii. 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Asiatic Researches</hi>,
iv. 40, 41, 50, 52 (8vo. ed.); Paul
Soleillet, <hi rend='italic'>L'Afrique Occidentale</hi>, p. 123
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> To snuff up the savour of the
sacrifice was similarly supposed to produce
inspiration. Tertullian, <hi rend='italic'>Apologet.</hi>
23.</note> The other mode of producing temporary
inspiration, to which I shall here refer, is by means of a
branch or leaves of a sacred tree. Thus in the Hindoo
Koosh a fire is kindled with twigs of the sacred cedar;
and the Dainyal or sibyl, with a cloth over her head,
inhales the thick pungent smoke till she is seized with
convulsions and falls senseless to the ground. Soon
she rises and raises a shrill chant, which is caught up
<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>
and loudly repeated by her audience.<note place='foot'>Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of the Hindoo
Koosh</hi>, p. 97.</note> So Apollo's
prophetess ate the sacred laurel before she prophesied.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Bis accus.</hi>, I; Tzetzes,
<hi rend='italic'>Schol. ad Lycophr.</hi>, 6.</note>
It is worth observing that many peoples expect the
victim as well as the priest or prophet to give signs of
inspiration by convulsive movements of the body; and
if the animal remains obstinately steady, they esteem
it unfit for sacrifice. Thus when the Yakuts sacrifice
to an evil spirit, the beast must bellow and roll about,
which is considered a token that the evil spirit has
entered into it.<note place='foot'>Vambery, <hi rend='italic'>Das Türkenvolk</hi>, p. 158.</note> Apollo's prophetess could give no
oracles unless the victim to be sacrificed trembled in
every limb when the wine was poured on its head.
But for ordinary Greek sacrifices it was enough that
the victim should shake its head; to make it do so,
water was poured on it.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>De defect. oracul.</hi> 46, 49.</note> Many other peoples (Tonquinese,
Hindoos, Chuwash, etc.) have adopted the
same test of a suitable victim; they pour water or wine
on its head; if the animal shakes its head it is accepted
for sacrifice; if it does not, it is rejected.<note place='foot'>D. Chwolsohn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ssabier und
der Ssabismus</hi>, ii. 37; <hi rend='italic'>Lettres édifiantes
et curieuses</hi>, xvi. 230 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Panjab
Notes and Queries</hi>, iii. No. 721;
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Society
of Bombay</hi>, i. 103; S. Mateer, <hi rend='italic'>The
Land of Charity</hi>, 216; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Native Life
in Travancore</hi>, p. 94; A. C. Lyall,
<hi rend='italic'>Asiatic Studies</hi>, p. 14; Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes
of the Hindoo Koosh</hi>, p. 131; Pallas,
<hi rend='italic'>Reisen in verschiedenen Provinzen des
russischen Reiches</hi>, i. 91; Vambery,
<hi rend='italic'>Das Türkenvolk</hi>, p. 485; Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Archiv
für wissenschaftliche Kunde von Russland</hi>,
i. 377. When the Rao of Kachh
sacrifices a buffalo, water is sprinkled
between its horns; if it shakes its
head, it is unsuitable; if it nods its
head, it is sacrificed. <hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes
and Queries</hi>, i. No. 911. This is
probably a modern misinterpretation
of the old custom.</note>
</p>

<p>
The person temporarily inspired is believed to
acquire, not merely divine knowledge, but also, at
least occasionally, divine power. In Cambodia, when
an epidemic breaks out, the inhabitants of several
villages unite and go with a band of music at their
head to look for the man whom the local god is
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
believed to have chosen for his temporary incarnation.
When found, the man is taken to the altar of the god,
where the mystery of incarnation takes place. Then
the man becomes an object of veneration to his
fellows, who implore him to protect the village against
the plague.<note place='foot'>Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume du Cambodge</hi>, i. 177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The image of Apollo at Hylæ in Phocis
was believed to impart superhuman strength. Sacred
men, inspired by it, leaped down precipices, tore up
huge trees by the roots, and carried them on their
backs along the narrowest defiles.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, x. 32, 6.</note> The feats performed
by inspired dervishes belong to the same class.
</p>

<p>
Thus far we have seen that the savage, failing to
discern the limits of his ability to control nature,
ascribes to himself and to all men certain powers which
we should now call supernatural. Further, we have
seen that over and above this general supernaturalism,
some persons are supposed to be inspired for short
periods by a divine spirit, and thus temporarily to enjoy
the knowledge and power of the indwelling deity.
From beliefs like these it is an easy step to the conviction
that certain men are permanently possessed by
a deity, or in some other undefined way are endued
with so high a degree of supernatural powers as to be
ranked as gods and to receive the homage of prayer
and sacrifice. Sometimes these human gods are restricted
to purely supernatural or spiritual functions.
Sometimes they exercise supreme political power in
addition. In the latter case they are kings as well as
gods, and the government is a theocracy. I shall give
examples of both.
</p>

<p>
In the Marquesas Islands there was a class of men
who were deified in their life-time. They were supposed
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
to wield a supernatural power over the elements;
they could give abundant harvests or smite the ground
with barrenness; and they could inflict disease or
death. Human sacrifices were offered to them to avert
their wrath. There were not many of them, at the
most one or two in each island. They lived in mystic
seclusion. Their powers were sometimes, but not
always, hereditary. A missionary has described one of
these human gods from personal observation. The
god was a very old man who lived in a large house
within an enclosure. In the house was a kind of altar,
and on the beams of the house and on the trees round
it were hung human skeletons, head down. No one
entered the enclosure, except the persons dedicated to
the service of the god; only on days when human
victims were sacrificed might ordinary people penetrate
into the precinct. This human god received more
sacrifices than all the other gods; often he would sit on
a sort of scaffold in front of his house and call for two
or three human victims at a time. They were always
brought, for the terror he inspired was extreme. He
was invoked all over the island, and offerings were sent
to him from every side.<note place='foot'>Vincendon-Dumoulin et Desgraz,
<hi rend='italic'>Iles Marquises</hi>, pp. 226, 240 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, of the South Sea
Islands in general we are told that each island had a
man who represented or personified the divinity. Such
men were called gods, and their substance was confounded
with that of the deity. The man-god was
sometimes the king himself; oftener he was a priest
or subordinate chief.<note place='foot'>Moerenhout, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages aux Iles du
Grand Océan</hi>, i. 479; Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian
Researches</hi>, iii. 94.</note> Tanatoa, King of Raiatea, was
deified by a certain ceremony performed at the chief
temple. <q>As one of the divinities of his subjects,
<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>
therefore, the king was worshipped, consulted as an
oracle and had sacrifices and prayers offered to him.</q><note place='foot'>Tyerman and Bennet, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
Voyages and Travels in the South Sea
Islands, China, India, etc.</hi>, i. 524;
cp. p. 529 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
This was not an exceptional case. The kings of the
island regularly enjoyed divine honours, being deified
at the time of their accession.<note place='foot'>Tyerman and Bennet, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i.
529 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At his inauguration the
king of Tahiti received a sacred girdle of red and
yellow feathers, <q>which not only raised him to the
highest earthly station, but identified him with their
gods.</q><note place='foot'>Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>, iii. 108.</note> The gods of Samoa generally appeared in
animal form, but sometimes they were permanently
incarnate in men, who gave oracles, received offerings
(occasionally of human flesh), healed the sick, answered
prayers, and so on.<note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, pp. 37, 48, 57, 58,
59, 73.</note> In regard to the old religion of the
Fijians, and especially of the inhabitants of Somo-somo,
it is said that <q>there appears to be no certain
line of demarcation between departed spirits and gods,
nor between gods and living men, for many of the
priests and old chiefs are considered as sacred persons,
and not a few of them will also claim to themselves the
right of divinity. <q>I am a god,</q> Tuikilakila would
say; and he believed it too.</q><note place='foot'>Hazlewood in Erskine's <hi rend='italic'>Cruise
among the Islands of the Western
Pacific</hi>, p. 246 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Cp. Wilkes's <hi rend='italic'>Narrative
of the U. S. Exploring Expedition</hi>,
iii. 87.</note> In the Pelew Islands
it is believed that every god can take possession of a
man and speak through him. The possession may be
either temporary or permanent; in the latter case the
chosen person is called a <foreign rend='italic'>korong</foreign>. The god is free in
his choice, so the position of <foreign rend='italic'>korong</foreign> is not hereditary.
After the death of a <foreign rend='italic'>korong</foreign> the god is for some time
unrepresented, until he suddenly makes his appearance
in a new Avatar. The person thus chosen gives signs
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
of the divine presence by behaving in a strange way;
he gapes, runs about, and performs a number of senseless
acts. At first people laugh at him, but his sacred
mission is in time recognised, and he is invited to
assume his proper position in the state. Generally
this position is a distinguished one and confers on him
a powerful influence over the whole community. In
some of the islands the god is political sovereign of
the land; and hence his new incarnation, however
humble his origin, is raised to the same high rank, and
rules, as god and king, over all the other chiefs.<note place='foot'>Kubary, <q>Die Religion der Pelauer,</q>
in Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus Volks- und
Menschenkunde</hi>, i. 30 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In
time of public calamity, as during war or pestilence,
some of the Molucca Islanders used to celebrate a festival
of heaven. If no good result followed, they bought
a slave, took him at the next festival to the place of
sacrifice, and set him on a raised place under a certain
bamboo-tree. This tree represented heaven and had
been honoured as its image at previous festivals. The
portion of the sacrifice which had previously been
offered to heaven was now given to the slave, who ate
and drank it in the name and stead of heaven. Henceforth
the slave was well treated, kept for the festivals
of heaven, and employed to represent heaven and
receive the offerings in its name.<note place='foot'>F. Valentyn, <hi rend='italic'>Oud en nieuw Oost-Indiën</hi>,
iii. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Tonquin every
village chooses its guardian spirit, often in the form of
an animal, as a dog, tiger, cat, or serpent. Sometimes
a living person is selected as patron-divinity. Thus a
beggar persuaded the people of a village that he was
their guardian spirit; so they loaded him with honours
and entertained him with their best.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, iv. 383.</note> In India <q>every
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
king is regarded as little short of a present god.</q><note place='foot'>Monier Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Religious Life
and Thought in India</hi>, p. 259.</note>
The Indian law-book of Manu goes farther and says
that <q>even an infant king must not be despised from
an idea that he is a mere mortal; for he is a great
deity in human form.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Laws of Manu</hi>, vii. 8, trans.
by G. Bühler.</note> There is said to be a sect in
Orissa who worship the Queen of England as their
chief divinity. And to this day in India all living
persons remarkable for great strength or valour or for
supposed miraculous powers run the risk of being
worshipped as gods. Thus, a sect in the Punjaub
worshipped a deity whom they called Nikkal Sen.
This Nikkal Sen was no other than the redoubted
General Nicholson, and nothing that the general could
do or say damped the enthusiasm of his adorers. The
more he punished them, the greater grew the religious
awe with which they worshipped him.<note place='foot'>Monier Williams, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 259 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst the
Todas, a pastoral people of the Neilgherry Hills of
Southern India, the dairy is a sanctuary, and the milkman
(<foreign rend='italic'>pâlâl</foreign>) who attends to it is a god. On being
asked whether the Todas salute the sun, one of these
divine milkmen replied, <q>Those poor fellows do so,
but I,</q> tapping his chest, <q>I, a god! why should I
salute the sun?</q> Every one, even his own father, prostrates
himself before the milkman, and no one would
dare to refuse him anything. No human being, except
another milkman, may touch him; and he gives oracles
to all who consult him, speaking with the voice of
a god.<note place='foot'>Marshall, <hi rend='italic'>Travels among the Todas</hi>,
pp. 136, 137; cp. pp. 141, 142; Metz,
<hi rend='italic'>Tribes of the Neilgherry Hills</hi>, p. 19 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The King of Iddah told the English officers of the
Niger Expedition, <q>God made me after his own
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
image; I am all the same as God; and He appointed
me a king.</q><note place='foot'>Allen and Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of
the Expedition to the River Niger in
1841</hi>, i. 288.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes, at the death of the human incarnation,
the divine spirit transmigrates into another man. In the
kingdom of Kaffa, in Eastern Africa, the heathen part
of the people worship a spirit called <foreign rend='italic'>Deòce</foreign>, to whom
they offer prayer and sacrifice, and whom they invoke
on all important occasions. This spirit is incarnate in
the grand magician or pope, a person of great wealth
and influence, ranking almost with the king, and wielding
the spiritual, as the king wields the temporal,
power. It happened that, shortly before the arrival of
a Christian missionary in the kingdom, this African
pope died, and the priests, fearing that the missionary
would assume the position vacated by the deceased
pope, declared that the <foreign rend='italic'>Deòce</foreign> had passed into the king,
who henceforth, uniting the spiritual with the temporal
power, reigned as god and king.<note place='foot'>G. Massaja, <hi rend='italic'>I miei trentacinque
anni di missione nell' alta Etiopia</hi> (Rome
and Milan, 1888), v. 53 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Before beginning to
work at the salt-pans in a Laosian village, the workmen
offer sacrifice to a local divinity. This divinity is
incarnate in a woman and transmigrates at her death
into another woman.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notes sur le Laos</hi>,
p. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Bhotan the spiritual head of
the government is a person called the Dhurma Raja,
who is supposed to be a perpetual incarnation of the
deity. At his death the new incarnate god shows
himself in an infant by the refusal of his mother's milk
and a preference for that of a cow.<note place='foot'>Robinson, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptive Account of
Assam</hi>, p. 342 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Asiatic Researches</hi>,
xv. 146.</note> The Buddhist
Tartars believe in a great number of living Buddhas,
who officiate as Grand Lamas at the head of the most
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
important monasteries. When one of these Grand
Lamas dies his disciples do not sorrow, for they know
that he will soon reappear, being born in the form of
an infant. Their only anxiety is to discover the place
of his birth. If at this time they see a rainbow they
take it as a sign sent them by the departed Lama to
guide them to his cradle. Sometimes the divine infant
himself reveals his identity. <q>I am the Grand Lama,</q>
he says, <q>the living Buddha of such and such a temple.
Take me to my old monastery. I am its immortal
head.</q> In whatever way the birthplace of the Buddha
is revealed, whether by the Buddha's own avowal or
by the sign in the sky, tents are struck, and the joyful
pilgrims, often headed by the king or one of the most
illustrious of the royal family, set forth to find and
bring home the infant god. Generally he is born in
Tibet, the holy land, and to reach him the caravan has
often to traverse the most frightful deserts. When at
last they find the child they fall down and worship him.
Before, however, he is acknowledged as the Grand
Lama whom they seek he must satisfy them of his
identity. He is asked the name of the monastery of
which he claims to be the head, how far off it is, and
how many monks live in it; he must also describe the
habits of the deceased Grand Lama and the manner of
his death. Then various articles, as prayer-books,
tea-pots, and cups, are placed before him, and he has
to point out those used by himself in his previous life.
If he does so without a mistake his claims are admitted,
and he is conducted in triumph to the monastery.<note place='foot'>Huc, <hi rend='italic'>Souvenirs d'un Voyage dans la Tartarie et le Thibet</hi>, i. 279 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> ed.
12mo.</note> At
the head of all the Lamas is the Dalai Lama of Lhasa,
the Rome of Tibet. He is regarded as a living god
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
and at death his divine and immortal spirit is born
again in a child. According to some accounts the
mode of discovering the Dalai Lama is similar to the
method, already described, of discovering an ordinary
Grand Lama. Other accounts speak of an election
by lot. Wherever he is born, the trees and plants, it
is said, put forth green leaves; at his bidding flowers
bloom and springs of water rise; and his presence
diffuses heavenly blessings. His palace stands on a
commanding height; its gilded cupolas are seen sparkling
in the sunlight for miles.<note place='foot'>Huc, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 279, 347 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Meiners, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der Religionen</hi>, i.
335 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Georgi, <hi rend='italic'>Beschreibung aller
Nationen des Russischen Reichs</hi>, p. 415;
A. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in Siberia</hi>, ii. 303
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Roy. Geogr. Soc.</hi>,
xxxviii. (1868), 168, 169; <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings
of the Roy. Geogr. Soc.</hi> N.S.
vii. (1885) 67. In the <hi rend='italic'>Journal Roy.
Geogr. Soc.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>, the Lama in question
is called the Lama Gûrû; but the context
shows that he is the great Lama of
Lhasa.</note>
</p>

<p>
Issuing from the sultry valleys upon the lofty plateau
of the Colombian Andes, the Spanish conquerors were
astonished to find, in contrast to the savage hordes
they had left in the sweltering jungles below, a people
enjoying a fair degree of civilisation, practising agriculture,
and living under a government which Humboldt
has compared to the theocracies of Tibet and Japan.
These were the Chibchas, Muyscas, or Mozcas, divided
into two kingdoms, with capitals at Bogota and Tunja,
but united apparently in spiritual allegiance to the high
pontiff of Sogamozo or Iraca. By a long and ascetic
novitiate, this ghostly ruler was reputed to have
acquired such sanctity that the waters and the rain
obeyed him, and the weather depended on his will.<note place='foot'>Alex. von. Humboldt, <hi rend='italic'>Researches
concerning the Institutions and Monuments
of the Ancient Inhabitants of
America</hi>, ii. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Waitz, <hi rend='italic'>Anthropologie
der Naturvölker</hi>, iv. 352 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
J. G. Müller, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der Amerikanischen
Urreligionen</hi>, p. 430 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Martius,
<hi rend='italic'>Zur Ethnographie Amerikas</hi>, p. 455;
Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Culturländer des alten
Amerika</hi>, ii. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Weather kings are common in Africa. Thus the
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
Waganda of Central Africa believe in a god of Lake
Nyanza, who sometimes takes up his abode in a man
or woman. The incarnate god is much feared by all
the people, including the king and the chiefs. He is
consulted as an oracle; by his word he can inflict or
heal sickness, withhold rain, and cause famine. Large
presents are made him when his advice is sought.<note place='foot'>R. W. Felkin, <q>Notes on the
Waganda Tribe of Central Africa,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Royal Society of Edinburgh</hi>,
xiii. 762; C. T. Wilson and
R. W. Felkin, <hi rend='italic'>Uganda and the Egyptian
Soudan</hi>, i. 206.</note>
Often the king himself is supposed to control the
weather. The king of Loango is honoured by his
people <q>as though he were a god; and he is called
Sambee and Pango, which mean god. They believe
that he can let them have rain when he likes; and
once a year, in December, which is the time they want
rain, the people come to beg of him to grant it to
them.</q> On this occasion the king, standing on his
throne, shoots an arrow into the air, which is supposed
to bring on rain.<note place='foot'><q>The Strange Adventures of Andrew
Battel,</q> in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and
Travels</hi>, xvi. 330; Proyart, <q>History
of Loango, Kakongo, and other Kingdoms
in Africa,</q> in Pinkerton, xvi.
577; Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>,
p. 335.</note> Much the same is said of the king
of Mombaza.<note place='foot'>Ogilby, <hi rend='italic'>Africa</hi>, p. 615; Dapper,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 400.</note> The king of Quiteva, in Eastern Africa,
ranks with the deity; <q>indeed, the Caffres acknowledge
no other gods than their monarch, and to him they
address those prayers which other nations are wont to
prefer to heaven.... Hence these unfortunate beings,
under the persuasion that their king is a deity,
exhaust their utmost means and ruin themselves in
gifts to obtain with more facility what they need.
Thus, prostrate at his feet, they implore of him, when
the weather long continues dry, to intercede with
heaven that they may have rain; and when too much
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
rain has fallen, that they may have fair weather; thus,
also, in case of winds, storms, and everything, they
would either deprecate or implore.</q><note place='foot'>Dos Santos, <q>History of Eastern
Ethiopia,</q> in Pinkerton, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and
Travels</hi>, xvi. 682, 687 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst the
Barotse, a tribe on the upper Zambesi, <q>there is an
old, but waning belief, that a chief is a demigod, and in
heavy thunderstorms the Barotse flock to the chief's
yard for protection from the lightning. I have been
greatly distressed at seeing them fall on their knees
before the chief, entreating him to open the water-pots
of heaven and send rain upon their gardens.... The
king's servants declare themselves to be invincible,
because they are the servants of God (meaning <emph>the
king</emph>).</q><note place='foot'>F. S. Arnot, <hi rend='italic'>Garenganze; or,
Seven Years' Pioneer Mission Work in
Central Africa</hi>, London, N.D. (preface
dated March 1889), p. 78.</note> The chief of Mowat, New Guinea, is believed
to have the power of affecting the growth of crops for
good or ill, and of coaxing the <foreign rend='italic'>dugong</foreign> and turtle to
come from all parts and allow themselves to be taken.<note place='foot'>MS. notes by E. Beardmore.</note>
</p>

<p>
Amongst the Antaymours of Madagascar the king
is responsible for the growth of the crops and for every
misfortune that befalls the people.<note place='foot'>Waitz, <hi rend='italic'>Anthropologie der Naturvölker</hi>,
ii. 439.</note> In many places the
king is punished if rain does not fall and the crops do
not turn out well. Thus, in some parts of West
Africa, when prayers and offerings presented to the
king have failed to procure rain, his subjects bind him
with ropes and take him by force to the grave of his
forefathers, that he may obtain from them the needed
rain.<note place='foot'>Labat, <hi rend='italic'>Relation historique de
l'Ethiopie Occidentale</hi>, ii. 172-176.</note> It appears that the Scythians also, when food
was scarce, put their king in bonds.<note place='foot'>Schol. on Apollonius Rhod. ii.
1248. καὶ Ἡρόδωρος ξένως περὶ τῶν δεσμῶν
τοῦ Προμηθέως ταῦτα. Εἴναι γὰρ
αὐτὸν Σκυθῶν βασιλέα φησί; καὶ μὴ
δυνάμενον παρέχειν τοῖς ὑπηκόοις τὰ
ἐπιτήδεια, διὰ τὸν καλούμενον Ἀετὸν
ποταμὸν ἐπικλύζειν τὰ πεδία, δεθῆναι
ὑπὸ τῶν Σκυθῶν.</note> The Banjars in
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
West Africa ascribe to their king the power of causing
rain or fine weather. So long as the weather is fine
they load him with presents of grain and cattle. But
if long drought or rain threatens to spoil the crops,
they insult and beat him till the weather changes.<note place='foot'>H. Hecquard, <hi rend='italic'>Reise an der Küste und
in das Innere von West Afrika</hi>, p. 78.</note>
When the harvest fails or the surf on the coast is too
heavy to allow of fishing, the people of Loango accuse
their king of a <q>bad heart</q> and depose him.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, i. 354, ii. 230.</note> On the
Pepper Coast the high priest or Bodio is responsible
for the health of the community, the fertility of the
earth, and the abundance of fish in the sea and rivers;
and if the country suffers in any of these respects the
Bodio is deposed from his office.<note place='foot'>J. Leighton Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>West Afrika</hi>,
p. 93 (German translation).</note> So the Burgundians
of old deposed their king if the crops failed.<note place='foot'>Ammianus Marcellinus, xxviii. 5,
14.</note> Some
peoples have gone further and killed their kings in
times of scarcity. Thus, in the time of the Swedish
king Domalde a mighty famine broke out, which lasted
several years, and could be stayed by the blood neither
of beasts nor of men. So, in a great popular assembly
held at Upsala, the chiefs decided that king Domalde
himself was the cause of the scarcity and must be
sacrificed for good seasons. So they slew him and
smeared with his blood the altars of the gods. Again,
we are told that the Swedes always attributed good or
bad crops to their kings as the cause. Now, in the
reign of King Olaf, there came dear times and famine,
and the people thought that the fault was the king's,
because he was sparing in his sacrifices. So, mustering
an army, they marched against him, surrounded
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
his dwelling, and burned him in it, <q>giving him to
Odin as a sacrifice for good crops.</q><note place='foot'>Snorro Starleson, <hi rend='italic'>Chronicle of the
Kings of Norway</hi> (trans, by S. Laing),
saga i. chs. 18, 47. Cp. Liebrecht,
<hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde</hi>, p. 7; Scheffer, <hi rend='italic'>Upsalia</hi>,
p. 137.</note> In 1814, a
pestilence having broken out among the reindeer
of the Chukch, the Shamans declared that the
beloved chief Koch must be sacrificed to the angry
gods; so the chief's own son stabbed him with a
dagger.<note place='foot'>C. Russwurm, <q>Aberglaube in
Russland,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift für Deutsche
Mythologie und Sittenkunde</hi>, iv. 162;
Liebrecht, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, p. 15.</note> On the coral island of Niuē, or Savage
Island, in the South Pacific, there formerly reigned a
line of kings. But as the kings were also high priests,
and were supposed to make the food grow, the people
became angry with them in times of scarcity and killed
them; till at last, as one after another was killed, no
one would be king, and the monarchy came to an end.<note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 304 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
As in these cases the divine kings, so in ancient Egypt
the divine beasts, were responsible for the course of
nature. When pestilence and other calamities had
fallen on the land, in consequence of a long and severe
drought, the priests took the sacred animals secretly
by night, and threatened them, but if the evil did not
abate they slew the beasts.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 73.</note>
</p>

<p>
From this survey of the religious position occupied
by the king in rude societies we may infer that the
claim to divine and supernatural powers put forward
by the monarchs of great historical empires like those
of Egypt, Mexico, and Peru, was not the simple outcome
of inflated vanity or the empty expression of a
grovelling adulation; it was merely a survival and
extension of the old savage apotheosis of living kings.
<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>
Thus, for example, as children of the Sun the Incas of
Peru were revered like gods; they could do no wrong,
and no one dreamed of offending against the person,
honour, or property of the monarch or of any of the
royal race. Hence, too, the Incas did not, like most
people, look on sickness as an evil. They considered
it a messenger sent from their father the Sun to call his
son to come and rest with him in heaven. Therefore the
usual words in which an Inca announced his approaching
end were these: <q>My father calls me to come and
rest with him.</q> They would not oppose their father's
will by offering sacrifice for recovery, but openly
declared that he had called them to his rest.<note place='foot'>Garcilasso de la Vega, <hi rend='italic'>First Part
of the Royal Commentaries of the Yncas</hi>,
bk. ii. chs. 8 and 15 (vol. i. pp. 131,
155, Markham's Trans.)</note> The
Mexican kings at their accession took an oath that they
would make the sun to shine, the clouds to give rain,
the rivers to flow, and the earth to bring forth fruits
in abundance.<note place='foot'>Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the
Pacific States</hi>, ii. 146.</note> By Chinese custom the emperor is
deemed responsible if the drought be at all severe, and
many are the self-condemnatory edicts on this subject
published in the pages of the <hi rend='italic'>Peking Gazette</hi>. However
it is rather as a high priest than as a god that the
Chinese emperor bears the blame; for in extreme cases
he seeks to remedy the evil by personally offering
prayers and sacrifices to heaven.<note place='foot'>Dennys, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of China</hi>, p. 125.</note> The Parthian
monarchs of the Arsacid house styled themselves
brothers of the sun and moon and were worshipped as
deities. It was esteemed sacrilege to strike even a
private member of the Arsacid family in a brawl.<note place='foot'>Ammianus Marcellinus, xxiii. 6,
§ 5 and 6.</note>
The kings of Egypt were deified in their lifetime, and
their worship was celebrated in special temples and by
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
special priests. Indeed the worship of the kings
sometimes cast that of the gods into the shade. Thus
in the reign of Merenra a high official declared that
he had built many holy places in order that the spirits
of the king, the ever-living Merenra, might be invoked
<q>more than all the gods.</q><note place='foot'>C. P. Tiele, <hi rend='italic'>History of the
Egyptian Religion</hi>, p. 103 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> On the
worship of the kings see also E. Meyer,
<hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Altertums</hi>, i. § 52; A.
Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches Leben
im Altertum</hi>, p. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; V. von
Strauss und Carnen, <hi rend='italic'>Die altägyptischen
Götter und Göttersagen</hi>, p. 467 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The King of
Egypt seems to have shared with the sacred animals
the blame of any failure of the crops.<note place='foot'>Ammianus Marcellinus, xxviii. 5,
14; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 73.</note> He was
addressed as <q>Lord of heaven, lord of earth, sun, life
of the whole world, lord of time, measurer of the sun's
course, Tum for men, lord of well-being, creator of the
harvest, maker and fashioner of mortals, bestower of
breath upon all men, giver of life to all the host of
gods, pillar of heaven, threshold of the earth, weigher
of the equipoise of both worlds, lord of rich gifts, increaser
of the corn</q> etc.<note place='foot'>V. von Strauss und Carnen, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
p. 470.</note> Yet, as we should expect,
the exalted powers thus ascribed to the king differed
in degree rather than in kind from those which every
Egyptian claimed for himself. Tiele observes that
<q>as every good man at his death became Osiris, as
every one in danger or need could by the use of magic
sentences assume the form of a deity, it is quite comprehensible
how the king, not only after death, but
already during his life, was placed on a level with the
deity.</q><note place='foot'>Tiele, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Egyptian
Religion</hi>, p. 105. The Babylonian and
Assyrian kings seem also to have been
regarded as gods; at least the oldest
names of the kings on the monuments
are preceded by a star, the mark for
<q>god.</q> But there is no trace in
Babylon and Assyria of temples and
priests for the worship of the kings.
See Tiele, <hi rend='italic'>Babylonisch-Assyrische
Geschichte</hi>, p. 492 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Thus it appears that the same union of sacred
<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>
functions with a royal title which meets us in the King
of the Wood at Nemi, the Sacrificial King at Rome and
the King Archon at Athens, occurs frequently outside
the limits of classical antiquity and is a common feature
of societies at all stages from barbarism to civilisation.
Further, it appears that the royal priest is often a king
in fact as well as in name, swaying the sceptre as well
as the crosier. All this confirms the tradition of the
origin of the titular and priestly kings in the republics
of ancient Greece and Italy. At least by showing
that the combination of spiritual and temporal power,
of which Graeco-Italian tradition preserved the
memory, has actually existed in many places, we have
obviated any suspicion of improbability that might
have attached to the tradition. Therefore we may
now fairly ask, May not the King of the Wood have
had an origin like that which a probable tradition
assigns to the Sacrificial King of Rome and the King
Archon of Athens? In other words, may not his
predecessors in office have been a line of kings whom
a republican revolution stripped of their political power,
leaving them only their religious functions and the
shadow of a crown? There are at least two reasons
for answering this question in the negative. One
reason is drawn from the abode of the priest of Nemi;
the other from his title, the King of the Wood. If
his predecessors had been kings in the ordinary
sense, he would surely have been found residing, like
the fallen kings of Rome and Athens, in the city of
which the sceptre had passed from him. This city
must have been Aricia, for there was none nearer.
But Aricia, as we have seen, was three miles off from
his forest sanctuary by the lake shore. If he reigned,
it was not in the city, but in the greenwood. Again
<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>
his title, King of the Wood, hardly allows us to
suppose that he had ever been a king in the common
sense of the word. More likely he was a king of
nature, and of a special side of nature, namely, the
woods from which he took his title. If we could find
instances of what we may call departmental kings of
nature, that is of persons supposed to rule over
particular elements or aspects of nature, they would
probably present a closer analogy to the King of the
Wood than the divine kings we have been hitherto
considering, whose control of nature is general rather
than special. Instances of such departmental kings
are not wanting.
</p>

<p>
On a hill at Bomma (the mouth of the Congo)
dwells Namvulu Vumu, King of the Rain and Storm.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</hi>, ii. 230.</note>
Of some of the tribes on the Upper Nile we are told
that they have no kings in the common sense; the
only persons whom they acknowledge as such are the
Kings of the Rain, <foreign rend='italic'>Mata Kodou</foreign>, who are credited
with the power of giving rain at the proper time, that
is in the rainy season. Before the rains begin to fall
at the end of March the country is a parched and arid
desert; and the cattle, which form the people's chief
wealth, perish for lack of grass. So, when the end of
March draws on, each householder betakes himself to
the King of the Rain and offers him a cow that he
may make the rain to fall soon. If no shower
falls, the people assemble and demand that the
king shall give them rain; and if the sky still
continues cloudless, they rip up his belly in which
he is believed to keep the storms. Amongst
the Bari tribe one of these Rain Kings made rain
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
by sprinkling water on the ground out of a hand-bell.<note place='foot'><q>Excursion de M. Brun-Rollet dans
la région supérieure du Nil,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin
de la Société de Géographie</hi>, Paris, 1852,
pt. ii. p. 421 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Among tribes on the outskirts of Abyssinia a
similar office exists and has been thus described by an
observer. <q>The priesthood of the Alfai, as he is
called by the Barea and Kunáma, is a remarkable one;
he is believed to be able to make rain. This office
formerly existed among the Algeds and appears to be
still common to the Nuba negroes. The Alfai of the
Bareas, who is also consulted by the northern Kunáma,
lives near Tembádere on a mountain alone with his
family. The people bring him tribute in the form of
clothes and fruits, and cultivate for him a large field of
his own. He is a kind of king, and his office passes
by inheritance to his brother or sister's son. He is
supposed to conjure down rain and to drive away the
locusts. But if he disappoints the people's expectation
and a great drought arises in the land, the Alfai is stoned
to death, and his nearest relations are obliged to cast
the first stone at him. When we passed through the
country, the office of Alfai was still held by an old
man; but I heard that rain-making had proved too
dangerous for him and that he had renounced his
office.</q><note place='foot'>W. Munzinger, <hi rend='italic'>Ostafrikanische
Studien</hi>, p. 474 (Schaffhausen, 1864).</note>
</p>

<p>
In the backwoods of Cambodia live two mysterious
sovereigns known as the King of the Fire and the
King of the Water. Their fame is spread all over the
south of the great Indo-Chinese peninsula; but only a
faint echo of it has reached the West. No European,
so far as is known, has ever seen them; and their very
existence might have passed for a fable, were it not
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
that till a few years ago communications were
regularly maintained between them and the King of
Cambodia, who year by year exchanged presents with
them. The Cambodian gifts were passed from tribe
to tribe till they reached their destination; for no
Cambodian would essay the long and perilous journey.
The tribe amongst whom the Kings of Fire and
Water reside is the Chréais or Jaray, a race with
European features but a sallow complexion, inhabiting
the forest-clad mountains and high plateaux which
separate Cambodia from Annam. Their royal
functions are of a purely mystic or spiritual order;
they have no political authority; they are simple
peasants, living by the sweat of their brow and the
offerings of the faithful. According to one account
they live in absolute solitude, never meeting each other
and never seeing a human face. They inhabit
successively seven towers perched upon seven
mountains, and every year they pass from one tower
to another. People come furtively and cast within
their reach what is needful for their subsistence. The
kingship lasts seven years, the time necessary to
inhabit all the towers successively; but many die
before their time is out. The offices are hereditary
in one or (according to others) two royal families, who
enjoy high consideration, have revenues assigned to
them, and are exempt from the necessity of tilling the
ground. But naturally the dignity is not coveted, and
when a vacancy occurs, all eligible men (they must be
strong and have children) flee and hide themselves.
Another account, admitting the reluctance of the
hereditary candidates to accept the crown, does not
countenance the report of their hermit-like seclusion
in the seven towers. For it represents the people
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
as prostrating themselves before the mystic kings
whenever they appear in public, it being thought that
a terrible hurricane would burst over the country if
this mark of homage were omitted.
</p>

<p>
The same report says that the Fire King, the
more important of the two, and whose supernatural
powers have never been questioned, officiates at
marriages, festivals, and sacrifices in honour of the
Yan. On these occasions a special place is set
apart for him; and the path by which he approaches
is spread with white cotton cloths. A
reason for confining the royal dignity to the same
family is that this family is in possession of certain
famous talismans which would lose their virtue or
disappear if they passed out of the family. These
talismans are three: the fruit of a creeper called
<foreign rend='italic'>Cui</foreign>, gathered ages ago but still fresh and green;
a rattan, also very old and still not dry; lastly a
sword containing a Yan or spirit, who guards
it constantly and works miracles with it. To
this wondrous brand sacrifices of buffaloes, pigs,
fowls, and ducks are offered for rain. It is kept
swathed in cotton and silk; and amongst the annual
presents sent by the King of Cambodia were rich
stuffs to wrap the sacred sword.
</p>

<p>
In return the Kings of Fire and Water sent him
a huge wax candle and two calabashes, one full of
rice and the other of sesame. The candle bore the
impress of the Fire King's middle finger. Probably
the candle was thought to contain the seed of fire,
which the Cambodian monarch thus received once
a year fresh from the Fire King himself. The holy
candle was kept for sacred uses. On reaching the
capital of Cambodia it was entrusted to the Brahmans,
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
who laid it up beside the regalia, and with
the wax made tapers which were burned on the
altars on solemn days. As the candle was the
special gift of the Fire King, we may conjecture
that the rice and sesame were the special gift of
the Water King. The latter was doubtless king of
rain as well as of water, and the fruits of the earth
were boons conferred by him on men. In times of
calamity, as during plague, floods, and war, a little
of this sacred rice and sesame was scattered on the
ground <q>to appease the wrath of the maleficent
spirits.</q><note place='foot'>J. Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume du Cambodge</hi>,
i. 432-436; Aymonier, <q>Notes
sur les coutumes et croyances superstitieuses
des Cambodgìens,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Cochinchine
Française, Excursions et Reconnaissances</hi>,
No. 16, p. 172 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Notes sur le Laos</hi>, p. 60.</note>
</p>

<p>
These, then, are examples of what I have called
departmental kings of nature. But it is a far cry to
Italy from the forests of Cambodia and the sources of
the Nile. And though Kings of Rain, Water and
Fire have been found, we have still to discover a King
of the Wood to match the Arician priest who bore that
title. Perhaps we shall find him nearer home.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. Tree-worship.'/>
<head>§ 4.&mdash;Tree-worship.</head>

<p>
In the religious history of the Aryan race in
Europe the worship of trees has played an important
part. Nothing could be more natural. For
at the dawn of history Europe was covered with
immense primeval forests, in which the scattered
clearings must have appeared like islets in an ocean
of green. Down to the first century before our
era the Hercynian forest stretched eastward from
<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>
the Rhine for a distance at once vast and unknown;
Germans whom Caesar questioned had travelled for
two months through it without reaching the end.<note place='foot'>Caesar, <hi rend='italic'>Bell. Gall.</hi> vi. 25.</note>
In our own country the wealds of Kent, Surrey, and
Sussex are remnants of the great forest of Anderida,
which once clothed the whole of the south eastern
portion of the island. Westward it seems to have
stretched till it joined another forest that extended
from Hampshire to Devon. In the reign of Henry
II the citizens of London still hunted the wild bull
and the boar in the forest of Hampstead. Even
under the later Plantagenets the royal forests were
sixty-eight in number. In the forest of Arden it
was said that down to modern times a squirrel
might leap from tree to tree for nearly the whole
length of Warwickshire.<note place='foot'>Elton, <hi rend='italic'>Origins of English History</hi>,
pp. 3, 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 224.</note> The excavation of prehistoric
pile-villages in the valley of the Po has
shown that long before the rise and probably the
foundation of Rome the north of Italy was covered
with dense forests of elms, chestnuts, and especially
of oaks.<note place='foot'>W. Helbig, <hi rend='italic'>Die Italiker in der
Poebene</hi>, p. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Archaeology is here confirmed by history;
for classical writers contain many references to
Italian forests which have now disappeared.<note place='foot'>H. Nissen, <hi rend='italic'>Italische Landeskunde</hi>,
p. 431 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In
Greece the woods of the present day are a mere
fraction of those which clothed great tracts in antiquity,
and which at a more remote epoch may have spanned
the Greek peninsula from sea to sea.<note place='foot'>Neumann und Partsch, <hi rend='italic'>Physikalische
Geographie von Griechenland</hi>,
p. 357 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
From an examination of the Teutonic words for
<q>temple</q> Grimm has made it probable that amongst
<pb n='058'/><anchor id='Pg058'/>
the Germans the oldest sanctuaries were natural woods.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i.
53 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
However this may be, tree-worship is well attested
for all the great European families of the Aryan stock.
Amongst the Celts the oak-worship of the Druids is
familiar to every one.<note place='foot'>The <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>locus classicus</foreign> is Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat.
Hist.</hi> xvi. § 249 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Sacred groves were common
among the ancient Germans, and tree-worship is hardly
extinct amongst their descendants at the present day.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi> i. 56 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
At Upsala, the old religious capital of Sweden, there
was a sacred grove in which every tree was regarded
as divine.<note place='foot'>Adam of Bremen, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptio Insul.
Aquil.</hi> p. 27.</note> Amongst the ancient Prussians (a Slavonian
people) the central feature of religion was the
reverence for the sacred oaks, of which the chief stood
at Romove, tended by a hierarchy of priests who kept
up a perpetual fire of oak-wood in the holy grove.<note place='foot'><q>Prisca antiquorum Prutenorum
religio,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Respublica sive Status Regni
Poloniae, Lituaniae, Prussiae, Livoniae</hi>,
etc. (Elzevir, 1627), p. 321 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Dusburg,
<hi rend='italic'>Chronicon Prussiae</hi>, ed. Hartknoch,
p. 79; Hartknoch, <hi rend='italic'>Alt- und Neues
Preussen</hi>, p. 116 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
The Lithuanians were not converted to Christianity
till towards the close of the fourteenth century, and
amongst them at the date of their conversion the worship
of trees was prominent.<note place='foot'>Mathias Michov, <q>De Sarmatia
Asiana atque Europea,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Novus Orbis
regionum ac insularum veteribus incognitarum</hi>
(Paris, 1532), pp. 455 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> 456
[wrongly numbered 445, 446]; Martin
Cromer, <hi rend='italic'>De origine et rebus gestis Polonorum</hi>
(Basel, 1568), p. 241.</note> Proofs of the prevalence
of tree-worship in ancient Greece and Italy are abundant.<note place='foot'>See Bötticher, <hi rend='italic'>Der Baumkultus der
Hellenen</hi>.</note>
Nowhere, perhaps, in the ancient world was
this antique form of religion better preserved than in
the heart of the great metropolis itself. In the Forum,
the busy centre of Roman life, the sacred fig-tree of
Romulus was worshipped down to the days of the
empire, and the withering of its trunk was enough to
spread consternation through the city.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xv. § 77; Tacitus,
<hi rend='italic'>Ann.</hi> xiii. 58.</note> Again, on the
<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>
slope of the Palatine Hill grew a cornel-tree which
was esteemed one of the most sacred objects in Rome.
Whenever the tree appeared to a passer-by to be
drooping, he set up a hue and cry which was echoed by
the people in the street, and soon a crowd might be
seen running from all sides with buckets of water, as if
(says Plutarch) they were hastening to put out a fire.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Romulus</hi>, 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
But it is necessary to examine in some detail the
notions on which tree-worship is based. To the savage
the world in general is animate, and trees are no exception
to the rule. He thinks that they have souls like
his own and he treats them accordingly. Thus the
Wanika in Eastern Africa fancy that every tree and
especially every cocoa-nut tree has its spirit: <q>the
destruction of a cocoa-nut tree is regarded as equivalent
to matricide, because that tree gives them life
and nourishment, as a mother does her child.</q><note place='foot'>J. L. Krapf, <hi rend='italic'>Travels, Researches,
and Missionary Labours during an Eighteen
Years' Residence in Eastern Africa</hi>,
p. 198.</note> Siamese
monks, believing that there are souls everywhere and
that to destroy anything whatever is forcibly to dispossess
a soul, will not break a branch of a tree <q>as
they will not break the arm of an innocent person.</q><note place='foot'>Loubere, <hi rend='italic'>Historical Relation of the
Kingdom of Siam</hi>, p. 126.</note>
These monks, of course, are Buddhists. But Buddhist
animism is not a philosophical theory. It is simply a
common savage dogma incorporated in the system of
an historical religion. To suppose with Benfey and
others that the theories of animism and transmigration
current among rude peoples of Asia are derived from
Buddhism is to reverse the facts. Buddhism in this
respect borrowed from savagery, not savagery from
Buddhism. Again, the Dyaks ascribe souls to trees
and do not dare to cut down an old tree. In some
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
places, when an old tree has been blown down, they
set it up, smear it with blood, and deck it with
flags <q>to appease the soul of the tree.</q><note place='foot'>Hupe <q>Over de godsdienst, zeden,
enz. der Dajakker's</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Neêrland's Indië</hi>, 1846, dl. iii. 158.</note> People
in Congo place calabashes of palm-wine at the foot of
certain trees for the trees to drink when they are
thirsty.<note place='foot'>Merolla, <q>Voyage to Congo,</q> in
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, xvi.
236.</note> In India shrubs and trees are formally
married to each other or to idols.<note place='foot'>Monier Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Religious Life
and Thought in India</hi>, p. 334 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the North
West Provinces of India a marriage ceremony is
performed in honour of a newly-planted orchard; a
man holding the Salagram represents the bridegroom,
and another holding the sacred Tulsi (<foreign rend='italic'>Ocymum
sanctum</foreign>) represents the bride.<note place='foot'>Sir Henry M. Elliot and J. Beames,
<hi rend='italic'>Memoirs on the History etc. of the
Races of the North Western Provinces
of India</hi>, i. 233.</note> On Christmas Eve
German peasants used to tie fruit-trees together with
straw ropes to make them bear fruit, saying that the
trees were thus married.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Die gestriegelte Rockenphilosophie</hi>
(Chemnitz, 1759), p. 239 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; U. Jahn,
<hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Opfergebräuche bei Ackerbau
und Viehzucht</hi>, p. 214 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In the Moluccas when the clove-trees are in
blossom they are treated like pregnant women. No
noise must be made near them; no light or fire must
be carried past them at night; no one must approach
them with his hat on, but must uncover his head.
These precautions are observed lest the tree should
be frightened and bear no fruit, or should drop its
fruit too soon, like the untimely delivery of a woman
who has been frightened in her pregnancy.<note place='foot'>Van Schmid, <q>Aanteekeningen,
nopens de zeden, gewoonten en gebruiken,
etc., der bevolking van de eilanden
Saparoea, etc.</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift v. Neêrland's
Indië</hi>, 1843, dl. ii. 605; Bastian,
<hi rend='italic'>Indonesien</hi>, i. 156.</note> So when
the paddy (rice) is in bloom the Javanese say it is
pregnant and make no noises (fire no guns, etc.) near
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
the field, fearing that if they did so the crop would be
all straw and no grain.<note place='foot'>Van Hoëvell, <hi rend='italic'>Ambon en meer
bepaaldelijk de Oeliasers</hi>, p. 62.</note> In Orissa, also, growing rice
is <q>considered as a pregnant woman, and the same
ceremonies are observed with regard to it as in the
case of human females.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The Indian Antiquary</hi>, i. 170.</note>
</p>

<p>
Conceived as animate, trees are necessarily supposed
to feel injuries done to them. When an oak
is being felled <q>it gives a kind of shriekes or groanes,
that may be heard a mile off, as if it were the genius
of the oake lamenting. E. Wyld, Esq., hath heard it
severall times.</q><note place='foot'>J. Aubrey, <hi rend='italic'>Remaines of Gentilisme</hi>,
p. 247.</note> The Ojebways <q>very seldom cut
down green or living trees, from the idea that it puts
them to pain, and some of their medicine-men profess
to have heard the wailing of the trees under the axe.</q><note place='foot'>Peter Jones's <hi rend='italic'>History of the Ojebway
Indians</hi>, p. 104.</note>
Old peasants in some parts of Austria still believe that
forest-trees are animate, and will not allow an incision
to be made in the bark without special cause; they
have heard from their fathers that the tree feels the
cut not less than a wounded man his hurt. In felling
a tree they beg its pardon.<note place='foot'>A. Peter, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus Österreichisch-Schlesien</hi>,
ii. 30.</note> So in Jarkino the woodman
craves pardon of the tree he cuts down.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Indonesien</hi>, i. 154; cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des estlichen Asien</hi>, ii. 457
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, iii. 251 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, iv. 42 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again,
when a tree is cut it is thought to bleed. Some
Indians dare not cut a certain plant, because there
comes out a red juice which they take for the blood
of the plant.<note place='foot'>Loubere, <hi rend='italic'>Siam</hi>, p. 126.</note> In Samoa there was a grove of trees
which no one dared cut. Once some strangers tried
to do so, but blood flowed from the tree, and the sacrilegious
strangers fell ill and died.<note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 63.</note> Till 1855 there
was a sacred larch-tree at Nauders, in the Tyrol,
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
which was thought to bleed whenever it was cut;
moreover the steel was supposed to penetrate the
woodman's body to the same depth that it penetrated
the tree, and the wound on the tree and on the man's
body healed together.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes it is the souls of the dead which are
believed to animate the trees. The Dieyerie tribe of
South Australia regard as very sacred certain trees,
which are supposed to be their fathers transformed;
hence they will not cut the trees down, and protest
against the settlers doing so.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>,
p. 280.</note> Some of the Philippine
Islanders believe that the souls of their forefathers are
in certain trees, which they therefore spare. If obliged
to fell one of these trees they excuse themselves to it
by saying that it was the priest who made them fell it.<note place='foot'>Blumentritt, <q>Der Ahnencultus
und die religiösen Anschauungen der
Malaien des Philippinen-Archipels,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen der Wiener Geogr. Gesellschaft</hi>,
1882, p. 165 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In an Annamite story an old fisherman makes an incision
in the trunk of a tree which has drifted ashore;
but blood flows from the cut, and it appears that an
empress with her three daughters, who had been
cast into the sea, are embodied in the tree.<note place='foot'>Landes, <q>Contes et légendes annamites,</q>
No. 9, in <hi rend='italic'>Cochinchine Française,
Excursions et Reconnaissances</hi>,
No. 20, p. 310.</note>
The story of Polydorus will occur to readers of
Virgil.
</p>

<p>
In these cases the spirit is viewed as incorporate in
the tree; it animates the tree and must suffer and die
with it. But, according to another and no doubt later
view, the tree is not the body, but merely the abode of
the tree-spirit, which can quit the injured tree as men
quit a dilapidated house. Thus when the Pelew
Islanders are felling a tree, they conjure the spirit of
<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>
the tree to leave it and settle on another.<note place='foot'>Kubary in Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus
Mensch-und Volkenkunde</hi>, i. 52.</note> The Pádams
of Assam think that when a child is lost it has been
stolen by the spirits of the wood. So they retaliate
on the spirits by cutting down trees till they find the
child. The spirits, fearing to be left without a tree in
which to lodge, give up the child, and it is found in the
fork of a tree.<note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of Bengal</hi>, p.
25; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Volkerstämme am Brahmaputra</hi>,
p. 37.</note> Before the Katodis fell a forest-tree,
they choose a tree of the same kind and worship it by
presenting a cocoa-nut, burning incense, applying a red
pigment, and begging it to bless the undertaking.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Journal R. Asiatic Society</hi>, vii.
(1843) 29.</note>
The intention, perhaps, is to induce the spirit of the
former tree to shift its quarters to the latter. In clearing
a wood, a Galeleze must not cut down the last tree
till the spirit in it has been induced to go away.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Indonesien</hi>, i. 17.</note>
The Mundaris have sacred groves which were left
standing when the land was cleared, lest the sylvan
gods, disquieted at the felling of the trees, should
abandon the place.<note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of Bengal</hi>, pp.
186, 188; cp. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Volkerstämme
am Brahmaputra</hi>, p. 9.</note> The Miris in Assam are unwilling
to break up new land for cultivation so long as there
is fallow land available; for they fear to offend the
spirits of the woods by cutting down trees unnecessarily.<note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 33; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 16. Cp. W. Robertson Smith,
<hi rend='italic'>The Religion of the Semites</hi>, i. 125.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Sumatra, so soon as a tree is felled, a young
tree is planted on the stump; and some betel and a few
small coins are also placed on it.<note place='foot'>Van Hasselt, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbeschrijving van
Midden-Sumatra</hi>, p. 156.</note> Here the purpose is
unmistakable. The spirit of the tree is offered a new
home in the young tree planted on the stump of the
old one, and the offering of betel and money is meant
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
to compensate him for the disturbance he has suffered.
So in the island of Chedooba, on felling a large tree,
one of the woodmen was always ready with a green
sprig, which he ran and placed on the middle of the
stump the instant the tree fell.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Handbook of Folk-lore</hi>, p. 19 (proof).</note> For the same
purpose German woodmen make a cross upon the
stump while the tree is falling, in the belief that this
enables the spirit of the tree to live upon the
stump.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 83.</note>
</p>

<p>
Thus the tree is regarded, sometimes as the body,
sometimes as merely the house of the tree-spirit; and
when we read of sacred trees which may not be cut
down because they are the seat of spirits, it is not
always possible to say with certainty in which way the
presence of the spirit in the tree is conceived. In the
following cases, perhaps, the trees are conceived as the
dwelling-place of the spirits rather than as their bodies.
The old Prussians, it is said, believed that gods inhabited
high trees, such as oaks, from which they gave
audible answers to inquirers; hence these trees were
not felled, but worshipped as the homes of divinities.<note place='foot'>Erasmus Stella, <q>De Borussiae
antiquitatibus,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Novus Orbis regionum
ac insularum veteribus incognitarum</hi>,
p. 510; Lasiczki (Lasicius),
<q>De diis Samagitarum caeterorumque
Sarmatarum,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Respublica sive Status
Regni Poloniae, Lituaniae, Prussiae,
Livoniae</hi>, etc. (Elzevir, 1627), p. 299
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> There is a good and cheap reprint
of Lasiczki's work by W. Mannhardt in
<hi rend='italic'>Magazin herausgegeben von der Lettisch-Literarischen
Gesellschaft</hi>, xiv. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
(Mitau, 1868).</note>
The great oak at Romove was the especial dwelling-place
of the god; it was veiled with a cloth, which
was, however, removed to allow worshippers to see the
sacred tree.<note place='foot'>Simon Grünau, <hi rend='italic'>Preussische Chronik</hi>,
ed. Perlbach (Leipzig 1876), p.
89; <q>Prisca antiquorum Prutenorum
religio,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Respublica sive Status Regni
Poloniae</hi> etc., p. 321.</note> The Battas of Sumatra have been known
to refuse to cut down certain trees because they were
<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>
the abode of mighty spirits which would resent the
injury.<note place='foot'>B. Hagen, <q>Beiträge zur Kenntniss
der Battareligion,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Indische Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde</hi>,
xxviii. 530 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> The Curka Coles of India believe that the tops
of trees are inhabited by spirits which are disturbed by
the cutting down of the trees and will take vengeance.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, i. 134.</note>
The Samogitians thought that if any one ventured to
injure certain groves, or the birds or beasts in them,
the spirits would make his hands or feet crooked.<note place='foot'>Matthias Michov, in <hi rend='italic'>Novus Orbis
regionum ac insularum veteribus incognitarum</hi>,
p. 457.</note>
</p>

<p>
Even where no mention is made of wood-spirits,
we may generally assume that when a grove is sacred
and inviolable, it is so because it is believed to be either
inhabited or animated by sylvan deities. In Livonia
there is a sacred grove in which, if any man fells a tree
or breaks a branch, he will die within the year.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi>, i.
497; cp. ii. 540, 541.</note> The
Wotjaks have sacred groves. A Russian who ventured
to hew a tree in one of them fell sick and died next
day.<note place='foot'>Max Buch, <hi rend='italic'>Die Wotjaken</hi>, p. 124.</note> Sacrifices offered at cutting down trees are
doubtless meant to appease the wood-spirits. In Gilgit
it is usual to sprinkle goat's blood on a tree of any
kind before cutting it down.<note place='foot'>Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of the Hindoo
Koosh</hi>, p. 116.</note> Before thinning a grove
a Roman farmer had to sacrifice a pig to the god or
goddess of the grove.<note place='foot'>Cato, <hi rend='italic'>De agri cultura</hi>, 139.</note> The priestly college of the
Arval Brothers at Rome had to make expiation when
a rotten bough fell to the ground in the sacred grove,
or when an old tree was blown down by a storm or
dragged down by a weight of snow on its branches.<note place='foot'>Henzen, <hi rend='italic'>Acta fratrum arvalium</hi>
(Berlin, 1874), p. 138.</note>
</p>

<p>
When a tree comes to be viewed, no longer as the
body of the tree-spirit, but simply as its dwelling-place
which it can quit at pleasure, an important advance
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
has been made in religious thought. Animism is
passing into polytheism. In other words, instead of
regarding each tree as a living and conscious being,
man now sees in it merely a lifeless, inert mass,
tenanted for a longer or shorter time by a supernatural
being who, as he can pass freely from tree to tree,
thereby enjoys a certain right of possession or lordship
over the trees, and, ceasing to be a tree-soul, becomes
a forest god. As soon as the tree-spirit is thus in a
measure disengaged from each particular tree, he
begins to change his shape and assume the body of
a man, in virtue of a general tendency of early thought
to clothe all abstract spiritual beings in concrete
human form. Hence in classical art the sylvan deities
are depicted in human shape, their woodland character
being denoted by a branch or some equally obvious
symbol.<note place='foot'>On the representations of Silvanus,
the Roman wood-god, see Jordan in
Preller's <hi rend='italic'>Römische Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> i. 393
<hi rend='italic'>note</hi>; Baumeister, <hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler des classischen
Altertums</hi>, iii. 1665 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> A
good representation of Silvanus bearing
a pine branch is given in the Sale Catalogue
of H. Hoffmann, Paris, 1888, pt. ii.</note> But this change of shape does not affect
the essential character of the tree-spirit. The powers
which he exercised as a tree-soul incorporate in a tree,
he still continues to wield as a god of trees. This I
shall now prove in detail. I shall show, first, that
trees considered as animate beings are credited with
the power of making the rain to fall, the sun to shine,
flocks and herds to multiply, and women to bring
forth easily; and, second, that the very same powers
are attributed to tree-gods conceived as anthropomorphic
beings or as actually incarnate in living men.
</p>

<p>
First, then, trees or tree-spirits are believed
to give rain and sunshine. When the missionary
Jerome of Prague was persuading the heathen
Lithuanians to fell their sacred groves, a multitude
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
of women besought the Prince of Lithuania to stop
him, saying that with the woods he was destroying
the house of god from which they had been
wont to get rain and sunshine.<note place='foot'>Aeneas Sylvius, <hi rend='italic'>Opera</hi> (Bâle, 1571),
p. 418 [wrongly numbered 420]; cp.
Erasmus Stella, <q>De Borussiae antiquitatibus,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Novus Orbis regionum ac insularum
veteribus incognitarum</hi>, p. 510.</note> The Mundaris
in Assam think if a tree in the sacred grove is
felled, the sylvan gods evince their displeasure by
withholding rain.<note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of Bengal</hi>, p.
186.</note> In Cambodia each village or
province has its sacred tree, the abode of a spirit. If
the rains are late, the people sacrifice to the tree.<note place='foot'>Aymonier in <hi rend='italic'>Excursions et Reconnaissances</hi>,
No. 16, p. 175 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
To extort rain from the tree-spirit a branch is sometimes
dipped in water, as we have seen above.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>.</note> In
such cases the spirit is doubtless supposed to be
immanent in the branch, and the water thus applied
to the spirit produces rain by a sort of sympathetic
magic, exactly as we saw that in New Caledonia the
rain-makers pour water on a skeleton, believing that
the soul of the deceased will convert the water into
rain.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>.</note> There is hardly room to doubt that Mannhardt
is right in explaining as a rain-charm the European
custom of drenching with water the trees which are
cut at certain popular festivals, as midsummer, Whitsuntide,
and harvest.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> pp. 158, 159,
170, 197, 214, 351, 514.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, tree-spirits make the crops to grow.
Amongst the Mundaris every village has its sacred
grove, and <q>the grove deities are held responsible for
the crops, and are especially honoured at all the great
agricultural festivals.</q><note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of Bengal</hi>, p. 188.</note> The negroes of the Gold
Coast are in the habit of sacrificing at the foot of
certain tall trees, and they think that if one of these
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
trees were felled, all the fruits of the earth would
perish.<note place='foot'>Labat, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage du Chevalier des
Marchais en Guinée, Isles voisines, et à
Cayenne</hi> (Paris, 1730), i. 338.</note> Swedish peasants stick a leafy branch in
each furrow of their corn-fields, believing that this
will ensure an abundant crop.<note place='foot'>L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>,
p. 266.</note> The same idea comes
out in the German and French custom of the Harvest-May.
This is a large branch or a whole tree, which
is decked with ears of corn, brought home on the last
waggon from the harvest-field, and fastened on the
roof of the farmhouse or of the barn, where it remains
for a year. Mannhardt has proved that this branch
or tree embodies the tree-spirit conceived as the spirit
of vegetation in general, whose vivifying and fructifying
influence is thus brought to bear upon the corn
in particular. Hence in Swabia the Harvest-May is
fastened amongst the last stalks of corn left standing
on the field; in other places it is planted on the cornfield
and the last sheaf cut is fastened to its trunk.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 190 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
The Harvest-May of Germany has its counterpart
in the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>eiresione</foreign> of ancient Greece.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 212 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>eiresione</foreign> was
a branch of olive or laurel, bound about with ribbons
and hung with a variety of fruits. This branch was
carried in procession at a harvest festival and was
fastened over the door of the house, where it remained
for a year. The object of preserving the Harvest-May
or the <foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>eiresione</foreign> for a year is that the life-giving
virtue of the bough may foster the growth of the
crops throughout the year. By the end of the year
the virtue of the bough is supposed to be exhausted
and it is replaced by a new one. Following a similar
train of thought some of the Dyaks of Sarawak are
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
careful at the rice harvest to take up the roots of a
certain bulbous plant, which bears a beautiful crown
of white and fragrant flowers. These roots are
preserved with the rice in the granary and are planted
again with the seed-rice in the following season; for
the Dyaks say that the rice will not grow unless a
plant of this sort be in the field.<note place='foot'>H. Low, <hi rend='italic'>Sarawak</hi>, p. 274.</note>
</p>

<p>
Customs like that of the Harvest-May appear to
exist in India and Africa. At a harvest festival of
the Lhoosai of S. E. India the chief goes with his
people into the forest and fells a large tree, which
is then carried into the village and set up in the
midst. Sacrifice is offered, and spirits and rice are
poured over the tree. The ceremony closes with
a feast and a dance, at which the unmarried men
and girls are the only performers.<note place='foot'>T. H. Lewin, <hi rend='italic'>Wild Races of
South-eastern India</hi>, p. 270.</note> Among the
Bechuanas the hack-thorn is very sacred, and it would
be a serious offence to cut a bough from it and carry
it into the village during the rainy season. But when
the corn is ripe in the ear the people go with axes, and
each man brings home a branch of the sacred hack-thorn,
with which they repair the village cattle-yard.<note place='foot'>J. Mackenzie, <hi rend='italic'>Ten years north of
the Orange River</hi>, p. 385.</note>
Many tribes of S. E. Africa will not cut down timber
while the corn is green, fearing that if they did so,
the crops would be destroyed by blight, hail, or early
frost.<note place='foot'>Rev. J. Macdonald, MS. notes.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, the fructifying power of the tree is put
forth at seed-time as well as at harvest. Among the
Aryan tribes of Gilgit, on the north-western frontier
of India, the sacred tree is the <foreign rend='italic'>Chili</foreign>, a species of cedar
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Juniperus excelsa</foreign>). At the beginning of wheat-sowing
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
the people receive from the Raja's granary a
quantity of wheat, which is placed in a skin mixed with
sprigs of the sacred cedar. A large bonfire of the
cedar wood is lighted, and the wheat which is to be
sown is held over the smoke. The rest is ground and
made into a large cake, which is baked on the same
fire and given to the ploughman.<note place='foot'>Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>Tribes of the Hindoo Koosh</hi>, p. 103 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here the intention
of fertilising the seed by means of the sacred cedar is
unmistakable. In all these cases the power of fostering
the growth of crops, and, in general, of cultivated
plants, is ascribed to trees. The ascription is not
unnatural. For the tree is the largest and most
powerful member of the vegetable kingdom, and man
is familiar with it before he takes to cultivating corn.
Hence he naturally places the feebler and, to him,
newer plant under the dominion of the older and more
powerful.
</p>

<p>
Again, the tree-spirit makes the herds to multiply
and blesses women with offspring. The sacred <foreign rend='italic'>Chili</foreign>
or cedar of Gilgit was supposed to possess this virtue
in addition to that of fertilising the corn. At the commencement
of wheat-sowing three chosen unmarried
youths, after undergoing daily washing and purification
for three days, used to start for the mountain where
the cedars grew, taking with them wine, oil, bread,
and fruit of every kind. Having found a suitable tree
they sprinkled the wine and oil on it, while they ate
the bread and fruit as a sacrificial feast. Then they
cut off the branch and brought it to the village,
where, amid general rejoicing, it was placed on a large
stone beside running water. <q rend='pre'>A goat was then sacrificed,
its blood poured over the cedar branch, and a
<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>
wild dance took place, in which weapons were
brandished about, and the head of the slaughtered
goat was borne aloft, after which it was set up as a
mark for arrows and bullet-practice. Every good
shot was rewarded with a gourd full of wine and some
of the flesh of the goat. When the flesh was finished
the bones were thrown into the stream and a general
ablution took place, after which every man went to his
house taking with him a spray of the cedar. On arrival
at his house he found the door shut in his face, and on
his knocking for admission, his wife asked, <q>What
have you brought?</q> To which he answered, <q>If you
want children, I have brought them to you; if you
want food, I have brought it; if you want cattle, I
have brought them; whatever you want, I have it.</q>
The door was then opened and he entered with his
cedar spray. The wife then took some of the leaves
and pouring wine and water on them placed them on
the fire, and the rest were sprinkled with flour and
suspended from the ceiling. She then sprinkled flour
on her husband's head and shoulders, and addressed
him thus: <q>Ai Shiri Bagerthum, son of the fairies,
you have come from far!</q> <foreign rend='italic'>Shiri Bagerthum</foreign>, <q>the
dreadful king,</q> being the form of address to the cedar
when praying for wants to be fulfilled. The next day
the wife baked a number of cakes, and taking them
with her, drove the family goats to the Chili stone.
When they were collected round the stone, she began
to pelt them with pebbles, invoking the Chili at the
same time. According to the direction in which the
goats ran off, omens were drawn as to the number and
sex of the kids expected during the ensuing year.
Walnuts and pomegranates were then placed on
the Chili stone, the cakes were distributed and
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
eaten, and the goats followed to pasture in whatever
direction they showed a disposition to go. For
five days afterwards this song was sung in all the
houses:&mdash;</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='none'><q rend='pre'>Dread Fairy King, I sacrifice before you,</q></q></l>
<l>How nobly do you stand! you have filled up my house,</l>
<l>You have brought me a wife when I had not one,</l>
<l>Instead of daughters you have given me sons.</l>
<l>You have shown me the ways of right,</l>
<l><q rend='post'><q rend='post'>You have given me many children.</q></q><note place='foot'>Biddulph, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 106 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Here the driving of the goats to the stone on which
the cedar had been placed is clearly meant to impart
to them the fertilising influence of the cedar. In
Europe the May-tree (May-pole) is supposed to
possess similar powers over both women and cattle.
In some parts of Germany on the 1st of May the
peasants set up May-trees at the doors of stables and
byres, one May-tree for each horse and cow; this is
thought to make the cows yield much milk.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 161; E.
Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>, p. 397.; A.
Peter, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus Österreichisch-Schlesien</hi>,
ii. 286; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalendar aus Böhmen</hi>,
p. 210.</note> Camden
says of the Irish, <q>They fancy a green bough of a
tree, fastened on May-day against the house, will
produce plenty of milk that summer.</q><note place='foot'>Quoted by Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>,
i. 227, Bohn's ed.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the 2d of July some of the Wends used to set
up an oak-tree in the middle of the village with an iron
cock fastened to its top; then they danced round it,
and drove the cattle round it to make them thrive.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 174.</note>
</p>

<p>
Some of the Esthonians believe in a mischievous
spirit called Metsik, who lives in the forest and has
the weal of the cattle in his hands. Every year a new
image of him is prepared. On an appointed day all
the villagers assemble and make a straw man, dress
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
him in clothes, and take him to the common pasture
land of the village. Here the figure is fastened to a
high tree, round which the people dance noisily. On
almost every day of the year prayer and sacrifice are
offered to him that he may protect the cattle. Sometimes
the image of Metsik is made of a corn-sheaf and
fastened to a tall tree in the wood. The people
perform strange antics before it to induce Metsik to
guard the corn and the cattle.<note place='foot'>Holzmayer, <q>Osiliana,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der Estnischen Gesell. zu Dorpat</hi>,
vii. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 407
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The Circassians regard the pear-tree as the protector
of cattle. So they cut down a young pear-tree in the
forest, branch it, and carry it home, where it is adored
as a divinity. Almost every house has one such pear-tree.
In autumn, on the day of the festival, it is
carried into the house with great ceremony to the
sound of music and amid the joyous cries of all the
inmates, who compliment it on its fortunate arrival.
It is covered with candles, and a cheese is fastened to
its top. Round about it they eat, drink, and sing.
Then they bid it good-bye and take it back to the
courtyard, where it remains for the rest of the year, set
up against the wall, without receiving any mark of
respect.<note place='foot'>Potocki, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage dans les steps
d'Astrakhan et du Caucase</hi> (Paris,
1829), i. 309.</note>
</p>

<p>
The common European custom of placing a green
bush on May Day before the house of a beloved
maiden probably originated in the belief of the fertilising
power of the tree-spirit.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 163 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> To
his authorities add, for Sardinia, R.
Tennant, <hi rend='italic'>Sardinia and its Resources</hi>
(Rome and London, 1885), p. 185 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Amongst the Kara-Kirgiz
barren women roll themselves on the ground
under a solitary apple-tree, in order to obtain offspring.<note place='foot'>Radloff, <hi rend='italic'>Proben der Volkslitteratur
der nördlichen Türkischen
Stämme</hi>, v. 2.</note>
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
Lastly, the power of granting to women an easy delivery
at child-birth is ascribed to trees both in Sweden
and Africa. In some districts of Sweden there was
formerly a <foreign lang='sv' rend='italic'>bårdträd</foreign> or guardian-tree (lime, ash, or
elm) in the neighbourhood of every farm. No one
would pluck a single leaf of the sacred tree, any injury
to which was punished by ill-luck or sickness. Pregnant
women used to clasp the tree in their arms in
order to ensure an easy delivery.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 51 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some negro
tribes of the Congo region pregnant women make
themselves garments out of the bark of a certain
sacred tree, because they believe that this tree delivers
them from the dangers that attend child-bearing.<note place='foot'>Merolla, <q>Voyage to Congo,</q> in
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, xvi.
236 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The story that Leto clasped a palm-tree and an olive-tree
or two laurel-trees when she was about to give
birth to Apollo and Artemis perhaps points to a
similar Greek belief in the efficacy of certain trees to
facilitate delivery.<note place='foot'>Bötticher, <hi rend='italic'>Der Baumkultus der
Hellenen</hi>, p. 30 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
From this review of the beneficent qualities commonly
ascribed to tree-spirits, it is easy to understand
why customs like the May-tree or May-pole have
prevailed so widely and figured so prominently in the
popular festivals of European peasants. In spring or
early summer or even on Midsummer Day, it was and
still is in many parts of Europe the custom to go out to
the woods, cut down a tree and bring it into the village,
where it is set up amid general rejoicings. Or the
people cut branches in the woods, and fasten them on
every house. The intention of these customs is to
bring home to the village, and to each house, the
blessings which the tree-spirit has in its power to bestow.
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
Hence the custom in some places of planting a May-tree
before every house, or of carrying the village May-tree
from door to door, that every household may
receive its share of the blessing. Out of the mass of
evidence on this subject a few examples may be selected.
</p>

<p>
Sir Henry Piers, in his <hi rend='italic'>Description of Westmeath</hi>,
writing in 1682 says: <q>On May-eve, every family
sets up before their door a green bush, strewed over
with yellow flowers, which the meadows yield plentifully.
In countries where timber is plentiful, they erect tall
slender trees, which stand high, and they continue
almost the whole year; so as a stranger would go nigh
to imagine that they were all signs of ale-sellers, and
that all houses were ale-houses.</q><note place='foot'>Quoted by Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular
Antiquities</hi>, i. 246 (ed. Bohn).</note> In Northamptonshire
a young tree ten or twelve feet high used to be
planted before each house on May Day so as to appear
growing.<note place='foot'>Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>British Popular Customs</hi>, p.
254.</note> <q>An antient custom, still retained by the
Cornish, is that of decking their doors and porches on
the 1st of May with green boughs of sycamore and
hawthorn, and of planting trees, or rather stumps of
trees, before their houses.</q><note place='foot'>Borlase, cited by Brand, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i.
222.</note> In the north of England it
was formerly the custom for young people to rise very
early on the morning of the 1st of May, and go out
with music into the woods, where they broke branches
and adorned them with nosegays and crowns of flowers.
This done, they returned about sunrise and fastened
the flower-decked branches over the doors and windows
of their houses.<note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 212 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Abingdon in Berkshire young
people formerly went about in groups on May morning,
singing a carol of which the following are some of the
verses&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>We've been rambling all the night;</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>And sometime of this day;</l>
<l>And now returning back again,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>We bring a garland gay.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>A garland gay we bring you here;</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>And at your door we stand;</l>
<l>It is a sprout well budded out,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><q rend='post'>The work of our Lord's hand.</q><note place='foot'>Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>Popular British Customs</hi>, p.
233.</note></l>
</lg>

</quote>

<p>
At the villages of Saffron Walden and Debden
in Essex on the 1st of May little girls go about
in parties from door to door singing a song almost
identical with the above and carrying garlands; a doll
dressed in white is usually placed in the middle of each
garland.<note place='foot'>Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>Book of Days</hi>, i. 578;
Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 237 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Seven Oaks on May Day the children
carry boughs and garlands from house to house, begging
for pence. The garlands consist of two hoops interlaced
crosswise, and covered with blue and yellow
flowers from the woods and hedges.<note place='foot'>Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 243.</note> In some
villages of the Vosges Mountains on the first Sunday
of May young girls go in bands from house to
house, singing a song in praise of May, in which
mention is made of the <q>bread and meal that come in
May.</q> If money is given them, they fasten a green
bough to the door; if it is refused, they wish the family
many children and no bread to feed them.<note place='foot'>E. Cortet, <hi rend='italic'>Fêtes religieuses</hi>, p. 167 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In
Mayenne (France), boys who bore the name of
<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>Maillotins</foreign> used to go about from farm to farm on
the 1st of May singing carols, for which they received
money or a drink; they planted a small tree or a branch
of a tree.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Revue des Traditions populaires</hi>, ii.
200.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the Thursday before Whitsunday the Russian
villagers <q>go out into the woods, sing songs, weave
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
garlands, and cut down a young birch-tree, which
they dress up in woman's clothes, or adorn with
many-coloured shreds and ribbons. After that comes
a feast, at the end of which they take the dressed-up
birch-tree, carry it home to their village with joyful
dance and song, and set it up in one of the houses,
where it remains as an honoured guest till Whitsunday.
On the two intervening days they pay
visits to the house where their <q>guest</q> is; but on the
third day, Whitsunday, they take her to a stream and
fling her into its waters,</q> throwing their garlands after
her. <q>All over Russia every village and every town
is turned, a little before Whitsunday, into a sort of
garden. Everywhere along the streets the young
birch-trees stand in rows, every house and every room
is adorned with boughs, even the engines upon the
railway are for the time decked with green leaves.</q><note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian
People</hi>, p. 234 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In this Russian custom the dressing of the birch in
woman's clothes shows how clearly the tree is conceived
as personal; and the throwing it into a stream is most
probably a rain-charm. In some villages of Altmark it
was formerly the custom for serving-men, grooms, and
cowherds to go from farm to farm at Whitsuntide
distributing crowns made of birch-branches and flowers
to the farmers; these crowns were hung up in the
houses and left till the following year.<note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Märkische Sagen und
Märchen</hi>, p. 315.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the neighbourhood of Zabern in Alsace bands of
people go about carrying May-trees. Amongst them
is a man dressed in a white shirt, with his face
blackened; in front of him is carried a large May-tree,
but each member of the band also carries a smaller one.
One of the company carries a huge basket in which he
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
collects eggs, bacon, etc.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 162.</note> In some parts of Sweden on
the eve of May Day lads go about carrying each a
bunch of fresh-gathered birch twigs, wholly or partially
in leaf. With the village fiddler at their head they go
from house to house singing May songs; the purport
of which is a prayer for fine weather, a plentiful
harvest, and worldly and spiritual blessings. One of
them carries a basket in which he collects gifts of
eggs and the like. If they are well received they
stick a leafy twig in the roof over the cottage door.<note place='foot'>L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>,
p. 235.</note>
</p>

<p>
But in Sweden midsummer is the season when
these ceremonies are chiefly observed. On the Eve
of St. John (23d June) the houses are thoroughly
cleansed and garnished with green boughs and
flowers. Young fir-trees are raised at the door-way
and elsewhere about the homestead; and very often
small umbrageous arbours are constructed in the
garden. In Stockholm on this day a leaf-market is
held at which thousands of May-poles (<foreign lang='sv' rend='italic'>Maj Stănger</foreign>)
six inches to twelve feet high, decorated with leaves,
flowers, slips of coloured paper, gilt egg-shells, strung
on reeds, etc. are exposed for sale. Bonfires are lit
on the hills and the people dance round them and
jump over them. But the chief event of the day
is setting up the May-pole. This consists of a straight
and tall spruce-pine tree, stripped of its branches.
<q>At times hoops and at others pieces of wood, placed
crosswise, are attached to it at intervals; whilst at
others it is provided with bows, representing so to
say, a man with his arms akimbo. From top to
bottom not only the <q>Maj Stăng</q> (May-pole) itself,
but the hoops, bows, etc. are ornamented with leaves,
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
flowers, slips of various cloth, gilt egg-shells, etc.;
and on the top of it is a large vane, or it may be a
flag.</q> The raising of the May-pole, the decoration
of which is done by the village maidens, is an affair
of much ceremony; the people flock to it from all
quarters and dance round it in a great ring.<note place='foot'>L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 257 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In
some parts of Bohemia also a May-pole or midsummer-tree
is erected on St. John's Eve. The lads fetch a
tall fir or pine from the wood and set it up on a
height, where the girls deck it with nosegays, garlands,
and red ribbons. Then they pile brushwood, dry
wood, and other combustible materials about the tree,
and, when darkness has fallen, set the whole on fire.
While the fire was burning the lads used to climb
up the tree and fetch down the garlands and ribbons
which the girls had fastened to it; but as this led
to accidents, the custom has been forbidden. Sometimes
the young people fling burning besoms into the
air, or run shouting down hill with them. When the
tree is consumed, the young men and their sweethearts
stand on opposite sides of the fire, and look at each
other through garlands and through the fire, to see
whether they will be true lovers and will wed. Then
they throw the garlands thrice across the smouldering
fire to each other. When the blaze has died down,
the couples join hands and leap thrice across the
glowing embers. The singed garlands are taken
home, and kept carefully in the house throughout
the year. Whenever a thunder-storm bursts, part of
the garlands are burned on the hearth; and when
the cattle are sick or are calving, they get a portion
of the garlands to eat. The charred embers of the
bonfire are stuck in the cornfields and meadows and
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
on the roof of the house, to keep house and field
from bad weather and injury.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalendar
aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 308 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
It is hardly necessary to illustrate the custom of
setting up a village May-tree or May-pole on May
Day. One point only&mdash;the renewal of the village
May-tree&mdash;requires to be noticed. In England the
village May-pole seems as a rule, at least in later
times, to have been permanent, not renewed from
year to year.<note place='foot'>Hone, <hi rend='italic'>Every-day Book</hi>, i. 547 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>Book of Days</hi>, i. 571.</note> Sometimes, however, it was renewed
annually. Thus, Borlase says of the Cornish people:
<q>From towns they make incursions, on May-eve,
into the country, cut down a tall elm, bring it
into the town with rejoicings, and having fitted
a straight taper pole to the end of it, and painted it,
erect it in the most public part, and upon holidays
and festivals dress it with garlands of flowers or
ensigns and streamers.</q><note place='foot'>Quoted by Brand, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 237.</note> An annual renewal seems
also to be implied in the description by Stubbs, a
Puritanical writer, of the custom of drawing home
the May-pole by twenty or forty yoke of oxen.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 235.</note>
In some parts of Germany and Austria the May-tree
or Whitsuntide-tree is renewed annually, a
fresh tree being felled and set up.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 169 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
We can hardly doubt that originally the practice
everywhere was to set up a new May-tree every year.
As the object of the custom was to bring in the
fructifying spirit of vegetation, newly awakened in
spring, the end would have been defeated if, instead
of a living tree, green and sappy, an old withered one
had been erected year after year or allowed to stand
permanently. When, however, the meaning of the
<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>
custom had been forgotten, and the May-tree was regarded
simply as a centre for holiday merrymaking,
people saw no reason for felling a fresh tree every
year, and preferred to let the same tree stand permanently,
only decking it with fresh flowers on May
Day. But even when the May-pole had thus become a
fixture, the need of giving it the appearance of being a
green tree, not a dead pole, was sometimes felt. Thus
at Weverham in Cheshire <q>are two May-poles, which
are decorated on this day (May Day) with all due
attention to the ancient solemnity; the sides are
hung with garlands, and the top terminated by a birch
or other tall slender tree with its leaves on; the bark
being peeled, and the stem spliced to the pole, so as
to give the appearance of one tree from the summit.</q><note place='foot'>Hone, <hi rend='italic'>Every-day Book</hi>, ii. 597 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Thus the renewal of the May-tree is like the renewal
of the Harvest-May; each is intended to secure a
fresh portion of the fertilising spirit of vegetation,
and to preserve it throughout the year. But whereas
the efficacy of the Harvest-May is restricted to
promoting the growth of the crops, that of the May-tree
or May-branch extends also, as we have seen,
to women and cattle. Lastly, it is worth noting that
the old May-tree is sometimes burned at the end
of the year. Thus in the district of Prague young
people break pieces off the public May-tree and
place them behind the holy pictures in their rooms,
where they remain till next May Day, and are then
burned on the hearth.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalendar
aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 217; Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 566.</note> In Würtemberg the bushes
which are set up on the houses on Palm Sunday are
sometimes left there for a year and then burnt.<note place='foot'>Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi>, ii. 74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B.
K.</hi> p. 566.</note> The
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>eiresione</foreign> (the Harvest-May of Greece) was perhaps
burned at the end of the year.<note place='foot'>Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Plutus</hi>, 1054; Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 222 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
So much for the tree-spirit conceived as incorporate
or immanent in the tree. We have now to show
that the tree-spirit is often conceived and represented
as detached from the tree and clothed in human form,
and even as embodied in living men or women. The
evidence for this anthropomorphic representation of
the tree-spirit is largely to be found in the popular
customs of European peasantry.
</p>

<p>
There is an instructive class of cases in which the
tree-spirit is represented simultaneously in vegetable
form and in human form, which are set side by side as
if for the express purpose of explaining each other.
In these cases the human representative of the tree-spirit
is sometimes a doll or puppet, sometimes a living
person; but whether a puppet or a person, it is placed
beside a tree or bough; so that together the person or
puppet, and the tree or bough, form a sort of bilingual
inscription, the one being, so to speak, a translation of
the other. Here, therefore, there is no room left for
doubt that the spirit of the tree is actually represented
in human form. Thus in Bohemia, on the fourth
Sunday in Lent, young people throw a puppet called
Death into the water; then the girls go into the
wood, cut down a young tree, and fasten to it a puppet
dressed in white clothes to look like a woman; with
this tree and puppet they go from house to house
collecting gratuities and singing songs with the
refrain&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>We carry Death out of the village,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>We bring Summer into the village.</q><note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalendar
aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 86 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 156.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>

<p>
Here, as we shall see later on, the <q>Summer</q> is the
spirit of vegetation returning or reviving in spring.
In some places in this country children go about
asking for pence with some small imitations of May-poles,
and with a finely dressed doll which they call
the Lady of the May.<note place='foot'>Chambers, <hi rend='italic'>Book of Days</hi>, i. 573.</note> In these cases the tree and
the puppet are obviously regarded as equivalent.
</p>

<p>
At Thann, in Alsace, a girl called the Little May
Rose, dressed in white, carries a small May-tree,
which is gay with garlands and ribbons. Her companions
collect gifts from door to door, singing a
song&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Little May Rose turn round three times,</q></l>
<l>Let us look at you round and round!</l>
<l>Rose of the May, come to the greenwood away,</l>
<l>We will be merry all.</l>
<l><q rend='post'>So we go from the May to the roses.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In the course of the song a wish is expressed that
those who give nothing may lose their fowls by the
marten, that their vine may bear no clusters, their tree
no nuts, their field no corn; the produce of the year is
supposed to depend on the gifts offered to these May
singers.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 312.</note> Here and in the cases mentioned above,
where children go about with green boughs on May
Day singing and collecting money, the meaning is that
with the spirit of vegetation they bring plenty and
good luck to the house, and they expect to be paid
for the service. In Russian Lithuania, on the 1st of
May, they used to set up a green tree before the village.
Then the rustic swains chose the prettiest girl, crowned
her, swathed her in birch branches and set her beside
the May-tree, where they danced, sang, and shouted
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
<q>O May! O May!</q><note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 313.</note> In Brie (Isle de France) a
May-tree is set up in the midst of the village; its top
is crowned with flowers; lower down it is twined with
leaves and twigs, still lower with huge green branches.
The girls dance round it, and at the same time a lad
wrapt in leaves and called Father May is led about.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 314.</note>
In Bavaria, on the 2d of May, a <foreign rend='italic'>Walber</foreign> (?) tree is
erected before a tavern, and a man dances round it,
enveloped in straw from head to foot in such a way
that the ears of corn unite above his head to form a
crown. He is called the <foreign rend='italic'>Walber</foreign>, and used to be led
in solemn procession through the streets, which were
adorned with sprigs of birch.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bavaria, Landes-und Volkskunde
des Königreichs Bayern</hi>, iii. 357; Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 312 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Carinthia, on St.
George's Day (24th April), the young people deck
with flowers and garlands a tree which has been felled
on the eve of the festival. The tree is then carried in
procession, accompanied with music and joyful acclamations,
the chief figure in the procession being the Green
George, a young fellow clad from head to foot in green
birch branches. At the close of the ceremonies the
Green George, that is an effigy of him, is thrown into
the water. It is the aim of the lad who acts Green
George to step out of his leafy envelope and substitute
the effigy so adroitly that no one shall perceive the
change. In many places, however, the lad himself
who plays the part of Green George is ducked in a
river or pond, with the express intention of thus ensuring
rain to make the fields and meadows green in
summer. In some places the cattle are crowned and
driven from their stalls to the accompaniment of a
song&mdash;
</p>

<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Green George we bring,</q></l>
<l>Green George we accompany,</l>
<l>May he feed our herds well,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>If not, to the water with him.</q><note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 313 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Here we see that the same powers of making rain and
fostering the cattle, which are ascribed to the tree-spirit
regarded as incorporate in the tree, are also attributed
to the tree-spirit represented by a living man.
</p>

<p>
An example of the double representation of the
spirit of vegetation by a tree and a living man is reported
from Bengal. The Oraons have a festival in
spring while the sál trees are in blossom, because
they think that at this time the marriage of earth is
celebrated and the sál flowers are necessary for the
ceremony. On an appointed day the villagers go with
their priest to the Sarna, the sacred grove, a remnant
of the old sál forest in which a goddess Sarna Burhi,
or woman of the grove, is supposed to dwell. She is
thought to have great influence on the rain; and the
priest arriving with his party at the grove sacrifices to
her five fowls, of which a morsel is given to each person
present. Then they gather the sál flowers and
return laden with them to the village. Next day the
priest visits every house, carrying the flowers in a wide
open basket. The women of each house bring out
water to wash his feet as he approaches, and kneeling
make him an obeisance. Then he dances with them
and places some of the sál flowers over the door of the
house and in the women's hair. No sooner is this done
than the women empty their water-jugs over him, drenching
him to the skin. A feast follows, and the young
people, with sál flowers in their hair, dance all night on
the village green.<note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of Bengal</hi>, p. 261.</note> Here, the equivalence of the flower-bearing
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
priest to the goddess of the flowering-tree
comes out plainly. For she is supposed to influence
the rain, and the drenching of the priest with water is,
doubtless, like the ducking of the Green George in
Bavaria, a rain-charm. Thus the priest, as if he were
the tree goddess herself, goes from door to door dispensing
rain and bestowing fruitfulness on each house,
but especially on the women.
</p>

<p>
Without citing more examples to the same effect,
we may sum up the result of the preceding paragraphs
in the words of Mannhardt. <q>The customs quoted
suffice to establish with certainty the conclusion that
in these spring processions the spirit of vegetation is
often represented both by the May-tree and in addition
by a man dressed in green leaves or flowers or by
a girl similarly adorned. It is the same spirit which
animates the tree and is active in the inferior plants
and which we have recognised in the May-tree and
the Harvest-May. Quite consistently the spirit is also
supposed to manifest his presence in the first flower
of spring and reveals himself both in a girl representing
a May-rose, and also, as giver of harvest, in the
person of the <foreign rend='italic'>Walber</foreign>. The procession with this
representative of the divinity was supposed to produce
the same beneficial effects on the fowls, the fruit-trees,
and the crops as the presence of the deity himself. In
other words, the mummer was regarded not as an
image but as an actual representative of the spirit of
vegetation; hence the wish expressed by the attendants
on the May-rose and the May-tree that those who
refuse them gifts of eggs, bacon, etc. may have no share
in the blessings which it is in the power of the itinerant
spirit to bestow. We may conclude that these begging
processions with May-trees or May-boughs from door
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
to door (<q>bringing the May or the summer</q>) had everywhere
originally a serious and, so to speak, sacramental
significance; people really believed that the god of
growth was present unseen in the bough; by the procession
he was brought to each house to bestow his
blessing. The names May, Father May, May Lady,
Queen of the May, by which the anthropomorphic spirit
of vegetation is often denoted, show that the conception
of the spirit of vegetation is blent with a personification
of the season at which his powers are most
strikingly manifested.</q><note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 315 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Thus far we have seen that the tree-spirit or the
spirit of vegetation in general is represented either in
vegetable form alone, as by a tree, bough, or flower; or
in vegetable and human form simultaneously, as by a
tree, bough, or flower in combination with a puppet or
a living person. It remains to show that the representation
of him by a tree, bough, or flower is sometimes
entirely dropped, while the representation of him by a
living person remains. In this case the representative
character of the person is generally marked by dressing
him or her in leaves or flowers; sometimes too it
is indicated by the name he or she bears.
</p>

<p>
We saw that in Russia at Whitsuntide a birch-tree
is dressed in woman's clothes and set up in the house.
Clearly equivalent to this is the custom observed on
Whit-Monday by Russian girls in the district of Pinsk.
They choose the prettiest of their number, envelop
her in a mass of foliage taken from the birch-trees and
maples, and carry her about through the village. In a
district of Little Russia they take round a <q>poplar,</q>
represented by a girl wearing bright flowers in her hair.<note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian People</hi>, p. 234.</note>
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
In the Département de l'Ain (France) on the 1st of
May eight or ten boys unite, clothe one of their number
in leaves, and go from house to house begging.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 318.</note>
At Whitsuntide in Holland poor women used to go
about begging with a little girl called Whitsuntide
Flower (<foreign rend='italic'>Pinxterbloem</foreign>, perhaps a kind of iris); she was
decked with flowers and sat in a waggon. In North
Brabant she wears the flowers from which she takes
her name and a song is sung&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Whitsuntide Flower</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Turn yourself once round.</q><note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 318; Grimm,
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 657.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In Ruhla (Thüringen) as soon as the trees begin
to grow green in spring, the children assemble on a
Sunday and go out into the woods, where they choose
one of their playmates to be the Little Leaf Man.
They break branches from the trees and twine them
about the child till only his shoes peep out from the
leafy mantle. Holes are made in it for him to see
through, and two of the children lead the Little Leaf
Man that he may not stumble or fall. Singing and
dancing they take him from house to house, asking
for gifts of food (eggs, cream, sausage, cakes). Lastly
they sprinkle the Leaf Man with water and feast on
the food they have collected.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 320; Witzschel,
<hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus
Thüringen</hi>, p. 211.</note> In England the best-known
example of these leaf-clad mummers is the
Jack-in-the-Green, a chimney-sweeper who walks
encased in a pyramidal-shaped framework of wicker-work,
which is covered with holly and ivy, and
surmounted by a crown of flowers and ribbons. Thus
arrayed he dances on May Day at the head of a troop
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
of chimney-sweeps, who collect pence.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 322; Hone,
<hi rend='italic'>Every-day Book</hi>, i. 583 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Dyer,
<hi rend='italic'>British Popular Customs</hi>, p. 230 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some
parts also of France a young fellow is encased in a
wicker framework covered with leaves and is led
about.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 323.</note> In Frickthal (Aargau) a similar frame of
basketwork is called the Whitsuntide Basket. As
soon as the trees begin to bud, a spot is chosen in the
wood, and here the village lads make the frame with
all secrecy, lest others should forestall them. Leafy
branches are twined round two hoops, one of which
rests on the shoulders of the wearer, the other
encircles his calves; holes are made for his eyes and
mouth; and a large nosegay crowns the whole. In
this guise he appears suddenly in the village at the
hour of vespers, preceded by three boys blowing on
horns made of willow bark. The great object of his
supporters is to set up the Whitsuntide Basket beside
the village well, and to keep it and him there, despite
the efforts of the lads from neighbouring villages, who
seek to carry off the Whitsuntide Basket and set it
up at their own well.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi></note> In the neighbourhood of
Ertingen (Würtemberg) a masker of the same sort,
known as the Lazy Man (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Latzmann</foreign>), goes about the
village on Midsummer Day; he is hidden under a
great pyramidal or conical frame of wicker-work, ten
or twelve feet high, which is completely covered with
sprigs of fir. He has a bell which he rings as he
goes, and he is attended by a suite of persons dressed
up in character&mdash;a footman, a colonel, a butcher, an
angel, the devil, the doctor, etc. They march in
Indian file and halt before every house, where each
of them speaks in character, except the Lazy Man,
<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>
who says nothing. With what they get by begging
from door to door they hold a feast.<note place='foot'>Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus
Schwaben</hi>, ii. 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 325.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the class of cases of which the above are
specimens it is obvious that the leaf-clad person who
is led about is equivalent to the May-tree, May-bough,
or May-doll, which is carried from house to
house by children begging. Both are representatives
of the beneficent spirit of vegetation, whose visit to
the house is recompensed by a present of money or
food.
</p>

<p>
Often the leaf-clad person who represents the
spirit of vegetation is known as the king or the
queen; thus, for example, he or she is called the May
King, Whitsuntide King, Queen of May, and so on.
These titles, as Mannhardt observes, imply that the
spirit incorporate in vegetation is a ruler, whose
creative power extends far and wide.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 341 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In a village near Salzwedel a May-tree is set up
at Whitsuntide and the boys race to it; he who
reaches it first is king; a garland of flowers is put
round his neck and in his hand he carries a May-bush,
with which, as the procession moves along, he
sweeps away the dew. At each house they sing a
song, wishing the inmates good luck, referring to the
<q>black cow in the stall milking white milk, black hen
on the nest laying white eggs,</q> and begging a gift of
eggs, bacon, etc.<note place='foot'>Kuhn und Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche
Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche</hi>, p. 380.</note> In some villages of Brunswick at
Whitsuntide a May King is completely enveloped in
a May-bush. In some parts of Thüringen also they
have a May King at Whitsuntide, but he is got up
rather differently. A frame of wood is made in which
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
a man can stand; it is completely covered with birch
boughs and is surmounted by a crown of birch and
flowers, in which a bell is fastened. This frame is
placed in the wood and the May King gets into it.
The rest go out and look for him, and when they have
found him they lead him back into the village to the
magistrate, the clergyman, and others, who have to
guess who is in the verdurous frame. If they guess
wrong, the May King rings his bell by shaking his
head, and a forfeit of beer or the like must be paid by
the unsuccessful guesser.<note place='foot'>Kuhn und Schwartz, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
384; Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 342.</note> In some parts of Bohemia
on Whit-Monday the young fellows disguise themselves
in tall caps of birch bark adorned with flowers.
One of them is dressed as a king and dragged on a
sledge to the village green, and if on the way they
pass a pool the sledge is always overturned into it.
Arrived at the green they gather round the king;
the crier jumps on a stone or climbs up a tree and
recites lampoons about each house and its inmates.
Afterwards the disguises of bark are stripped off and
they go about the village in holiday attire, carrying
a May-tree and begging. Cakes, eggs, and corn
are sometimes given them.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalendar
aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 260 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 342 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Grossvargula, near
Langensalza, in last century a Grass King used to be
led about in procession at Whitsuntide. He was
encased in a pyramid of poplar branches, the top
of which was adorned with a royal crown of
branches and flowers. He rode on horseback with
the leafy pyramid over him, so that its lower end
touched the ground, and an opening was left in it
only for his face. Surrounded by a cavalcade of
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
young fellows, he rode in procession to the town
hall, the parsonage, etc., where they all got a drink
of beer. Then under the seven lindens of the neighbouring
Sommerberg, the Grass King was stripped
of his green casing; the crown was handed to the
Mayor, and the branches were stuck in the flax fields
in order to make the flax grow tall.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 347 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche
aus Thüringen</hi>, p. 203.</note> In this last
trait the fertilising influence ascribed to the representative
of the tree-spirit comes out clearly. In the
neighbourhood of Pilsen (Bohemia) a conical hut of
green branches, without any door, is erected at Whitsuntide
in the midst of the village. To this hut rides
a troop of village lads with a king at their head.
He wears a sword at his side and a sugar-loaf hat of
rushes on his head. In his train are a judge, a crier,
and a personage called the Frog-flayer or Hangman.
This last is a sort of ragged merryandrew, wearing
a rusty old sword and bestriding a sorry hack. On
reaching the hut the crier dismounts and goes round
it looking for a door. Finding none, he says, <q>Ah,
this is perhaps an enchanted castle; the witches creep
through the leaves and need no door.</q> At last he
draws his sword and hews his way into the hut, where
there is a chair, on which he seats himself and proceeds
to criticise in rhyme the girls, farmers, and farm-servants
of the neighbourhood. When this is over,
the Frog-flayer steps forward and, after exhibiting a
cage with frogs in it, sets up a gallows on which he
hangs the frogs in a row.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalendar
aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 253 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In the neighbourhood of
Plas the ceremony differs in some points. The king
and his soldiers are completely clad in bark, adorned
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
with flowers and ribbons; they all carry swords and
ride horses, which are gay with green branches and
flowers. While the village dames and girls are being
criticised at the arbour, a frog is secretly pinched and
poked by the crier till it quacks. Sentence of death
is passed on the frog by the king; the hangman
beheads it and flings the bleeding body among the
spectators. Lastly, the king is driven from the hut
and pursued by the soldiers.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalendar
aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 262; Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 353 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The pinching and
beheading of the frog are doubtless, as Mannhardt
observes,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 355.</note> a rain-charm. We have seen<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>.</note> that some
Indians of the Orinoco beat frogs for the express
purpose of producing rain, and that killing a frog is
a German rain-charm.
</p>

<p>
Often the spirit of vegetation in spring is represented
by a queen instead of a king. In the
neighbourhood of Libchowic (Bohemia), on the fourth
Sunday in Lent, girls dressed in white and wearing
the first spring flowers, as violets and daisies, in their
hair, lead about the village a girl who is called the
Queen and is crowned with flowers. During the
procession, which is conducted with great solemnity,
none of the girls may stand still, but must keep whirling
round continually and singing. In every house the
Queen announces the arrival of spring and wishes the
inmates good luck and blessings, for which she
receives presents.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalendar
aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 93; Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 344.</note> In German Hungary the girls
choose the prettiest girl to be their Whitsuntide Queen,
fasten a towering wreath on her brow, and carry her
singing through the streets. At every house they
stop, sing old ballads, and receive presents.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 343 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
south-east of Ireland on May Day the prettiest girl
used to be chosen Queen of the district for twelve
months. She was crowned with wild flowers; feasting,
dancing, and rustic sports followed, and were closed by
a grand procession in the evening. During her year
of office she presided over rural gatherings of young
people at dances and merrymakings. If she married
before next May Day her authority was at an end,
but her successor was not elected till that day came
round.<note place='foot'>Dyer, <hi rend='italic'>British Popular Customs</hi>,
p. 270 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The May Queen is common in France<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 344 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Cortet, <hi rend='italic'>Fêtes religieuses</hi>, p. 160 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Monnier, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions populaires comparées</hi>,
p. 282 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Bérenger-Féraud,
<hi rend='italic'>Réminiscences populaires de la Provence</hi>,
p. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and
familiar in England.
</p>

<p>
Again the spirit of vegetation is sometimes
represented by a king and queen, a lord and lady, or
a bridegroom and bride. Here again the parallelism
holds between the anthropomorphic and the vegetable
representation of the tree-spirit, for we have seen
above that trees are sometimes married to each other.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg060'>60</ref>.</note>
In a village near Königgrätz (Bohemia) on Whit-Monday
the children play the king's game, at which a
king and a queen march about under a canopy, the
queen wearing a garland, and the youngest girl
carrying two wreaths on a plate behind them. They
are attended by boys and girls called groom's men and
bridesmaids, and they go from house to house
collecting gifts.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalendar
aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 265 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 422.</note> Near Grenoble, in France, a king
and queen are chosen on the 1st of May and are set on
a throne for all to see.<note place='foot'>Monnier, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions populaires comparées</hi>,
p. 304; Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p.
423.</note> At Headington, near Oxford,
children used to carry garlands from door to door on
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
May Day. Each garland was carried by two girls,
and they were followed by a lord and lady&mdash;a boy and
girl linked together by a white handkerchief, of which
each held an end, and dressed with ribbons, sashes,
and flowers. At each door they sang a verse&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Gentlemen and ladies,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>We wish you happy May;</l>
<l>We come to show you a garland,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Because it is May-day.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
On receiving money the lord put his arm about his
lady's waist and kissed her.<note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, i.
233 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Bohn's ed.; Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi>
p. 424.</note> In some Saxon villages
at Whitsuntide a lad and a lass disguise themselves
and hide in the bushes or high grass outside the
village. Then the whole village goes out with music
<q>to seek the bridal pair.</q> When they find the couple
they all gather round them, the music strikes up, and
the bridal pair is led merrily to the village. In the
evening they dance. In some places the bridal pair
is called the prince and the princess.<note place='foot'>E. Sommer, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche aus Sachsen und Thüringen</hi>,
p. 151 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 431 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In the neighbourhood of Briançon (Dauphiné) on
May Day the lads wrap up in green leaves a young
fellow whose sweetheart has deserted him or married
another. He lies down on the ground and feigns to be
asleep. Then a girl who likes him, and would marry
him, comes and wakes him, and raising him up offers
him her arm and a flag. So they go to the alehouse,
where the pair lead off the dancing. But they must
marry within the year, or they are treated as old
bachelor and old maid, and are debarred the company
of the young folk. The lad is called the bridegroom
of the month of May (<foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>le fiancé du mois de May</foreign>). In
the alehouse he puts off his garment of leaves, out of
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
which, mixed with flowers, his partner in the dance
makes a nosegay, and wears it at her breast next day,
when he leads her again to the alehouse.<note place='foot'>This custom was told to Mannhardt
by a French prisoner in the war of
1870-71, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 434.</note> Like this
is a Russian custom observed in the district of
Nerechta on the Thursday before Whitsunday. The
girls go out into a birch-wood, wind a girdle or band
round a stately birch, twist its lower branches into a
wreath, and kiss each other in pairs through the
wreath. The girls who kiss through the wreath call
each other gossips. Then one of the girls steps
forward, and mimicking a drunken man, flings herself
on the ground, rolls on the grass, and feigns to go
fast asleep. Another girl wakens the pretended sleeper
and kisses him; then the whole bevy trips singing
through the wood to twine garlands, which they throw
into the water. In the fate of the garlands floating on
the stream they read their own.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 434 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In this custom the rôle
of the sleeper was probably at one time sustained by a
lad. In these French and Russian customs we have a
forsaken bridegroom, in the following a forsaken bride.
On Shrove Tuesday the Slovenes of Oberkrain drag
a straw puppet with joyous cries up and down the
village; then they throw it into the water or burn it,
and from the height of the flames they judge of the
abundance of the next harvest. The noisy crew is
followed by a female masker, who drags a great board
by a string and gives out that she is a forsaken bride.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 435.</note>
</p>

<p>
Viewed in the light of what has gone before, the
awakening of the forsaken sleeper in these ceremonies
probably represents the revival of vegetation in
spring. But it is not easy to assign their respective
<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>
rôles to the forsaken bridegroom and to the girl
who wakes him from his slumber. Is the sleeper
the leafless forest or the bare earth of winter? Is
the girl who wakens him the fresh verdure or the
genial sunshine of spring? It is hardly possible, on
the evidence before us, to answer these questions.
The Oraons of Bengal, it may be remembered,
celebrate the marriage of earth in the springtime,
when the sál-tree is in blossom. But from this we
can hardly argue that in the European ceremonies
the sleeping bridegroom is <q>the dreaming earth</q>
and the girl the spring blossoms.
</p>

<p>
In the Highlands of Scotland the revival of
vegetation in spring used to be graphically represented
as follows. On Candlemas day (2d February)
in the Hebrides <q>the mistress and servants of
each family take a sheaf of oats, and dress it up in
women's apparel, put it in a large basket, and lay
a wooden club by it, and this they call Brüd's bed;
and then the mistress and servants cry three times,
Brüd is come, Brüd is welcome. This they do just
before going to bed, and when they rise in the
morning they look among the ashes, expecting to
see the impression of Brüd's club there; which if
they do they reckon it a true presage of a good crop
and prosperous year, and the contrary they take as
an ill omen.</q><note place='foot'>Martin, <q>Description of the Western Islands of Scotland,</q> in Pinkerton's
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, iii. 613; Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 436.</note> The same custom is described by
another witness thus: <q>Upon the night before
Candlemas it is usual to make a bed with corn and
hay, over which some blankets are laid, in a part of
the house near the door. When it is ready, a person
goes out and repeats three times, ... <q>Bridget,
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
Bridget, come in; thy bed is ready.</q> One or more
candles are left burning near it all night.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Scotland and Scotsmen in the
Eighteenth Century</hi>, from the MSS.
of John Ramsay of Ochtertyre.
Edited by Alex. Allardyce (Edinburgh,
1888), ii. 447.</note>
</p>

<p>
Often the marriage of the spirit of vegetation in
spring, though not directly represented, is implied by
naming the human representative of the spirit <q>the
Bride,</q> and dressing her in wedding attire. Thus
in some villages of Altmark at Whitsuntide, while
the boys go about carrying a May-tree or leading a
boy enveloped in leaves and flowers, the girls lead
about the May Bride, a girl dressed as a bride with
a great nosegay in her hair. They go from house
to house, the May Bride singing a song in which
she asks for a present, and tells the inmates of each
house that if they give her something they will
themselves have something the whole year through;
but if they give her nothing they will themselves
have nothing.<note place='foot'>Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Märkische Sagen und
Märchen</hi>, p. 318 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 437.</note> In some parts of Westphalia two
girls lead a flower-crowned girl called <q>the Whitsuntide
Bride</q> from door to door, singing a song in
which they ask for eggs.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 438.</note> In Bresse in the month
of May a girl called <foreign rend='italic'>la Mariée</foreign> is tricked out with
ribbons and nosegays and is led about by a gallant.
She is preceded by a lad carrying a green May-tree,
and appropriate verses are sung.<note place='foot'>Monnier, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions populaires
comparées</hi>, p. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Cortet, <hi rend='italic'>Fêtes
religieuses</hi>, p. 162 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 439 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. Tree-worship in antiquity.'/>
<head>§ 5.&mdash;Tree-worship in antiquity.</head>

<p>
Such then are some of the ways in which the
tree-spirit or the spirit of vegetation is represented
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
in the customs of our European peasantry. From
the remarkable persistence and similarity of such
customs all over Europe we are justified in concluding
that tree-worship was once an important
element in the religion of the Aryan race in
Europe, and that the rites and ceremonies of the
worship were marked by great uniformity everywhere,
and did not substantially differ from those
which are still or were till lately observed by our
peasants at their spring and midsummer festivals.
For these rites bear internal marks of great
antiquity, and this internal evidence is confirmed by
the resemblance which the rites bear to those of rude
peoples elsewhere.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. 69 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 85.</note> Therefore it is hardly rash to
infer, from this consensus of popular customs, that
the Greeks and Romans, like the other Aryan
peoples of Europe, once practised forms of tree-worship
similar to those which are still kept up by
our peasantry. In the palmy days of ancient
civilisation, no doubt, the worship had sunk to the
level of vulgar superstition and rustic merrymaking,
as it has done among ourselves. We need not
therefore be surprised that the traces of such
popular rites are few and slight in ancient literature.
They are not less so in the polite literature of
modern Europe; and the negative argument cannot
be allowed to go for more in the one case than in
the other. Enough, however, of positive evidence
remains to confirm the presumption drawn from
analogy. Much of this evidence has been collected
and analysed with his usual learning and judgment
by W. Mannhardt.<note place='foot'>See especially his <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>.</note> Here I shall content myself
with citing certain Greek festivals which seem to be
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
the classical equivalents of an English May Day in
the olden time.
</p>

<p>
Every few years the Boeotians of Plataea held a
festival which they called the Little Daedala. On the
day of the festival they went out into an ancient oak
forest, the trees of which were of gigantic girth. Here
they set some boiled meat on the ground, and watched
the birds that gathered round it. When a raven was
observed to carry off a piece of the meat and settle on
an oak, the people followed it and cut down the tree.
With the wood of the tree they made an image, dressed
it as a bride, and placed it on a bullock-cart with a
bridesmaid beside it. It seems then to have been
drawn to the banks of the river Asopus and back
to the town, attended by a piping and dancing crowd.
After the festival the image was put away and kept
till the celebration of the Great Daedala, which fell
only once in sixty years. On this great occasion all
the images that had accumulated from the celebrations
of the Little Daedala were dragged on carts in solemn
procession to the river Asopus, and then to the top of
Mount Cithaeron. Here an altar had been constructed
of square blocks of wood fitted together and surmounted
by a heap of brushwood. Animals were
sacrificed by being burned on the altar, and the altar
itself, together with the images, were consumed by the
flames. The blaze, we are told, rose to a prodigious
height and was seen for many miles. To explain the
origin of the festival it was said that once upon a time
Hera had quarrelled with Zeus and left him in high
dudgeon. To lure her back Zeus gave out that he
was about to marry the nymph Plataea, daughter of
the river Asopus. He caused a wooden image to be
made, dressed and veiled as a bride, and conveyed on
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
a bullock-cart. Transported with rage and jealousy,
Hera flew to the cart, and tearing off the veil of the
pretended bride, discovered the deceit that had been
practised on her. Her rage was now changed to
laughter, and she became reconciled to her husband
Zeus.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ix. 3; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>ap.</hi>
Eusebius, <hi rend='italic'>Praepar. Evang.</hi> iii. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The resemblance of this festival to some of the
European spring and midsummer festivals is tolerably
close. We have seen that in Russia at Whitsuntide
the villagers go out into the wood, fell a birch-tree,
dress it in woman's clothes, and bring it back to the
village with dance and song. On the third day it is
thrown into the water.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, we have seen that in
Bohemia on Midsummer Eve the village lads fell a
tall fir or pine-tree in the wood and set it up on a
height, where it is adorned with garlands, nosegays,
and ribbons, and afterwards burnt.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>.</note> The reason for
burning the tree will appear afterwards; the custom
itself is not uncommon in modern Europe. In some
parts of the Pyrenees a tall and slender tree is cut
down on May Day and kept till Midsummer Eve. It
is then rolled to the top of a hill, set up, and burned.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 177.</note>
In Angoulême on St. Peter's Day, 29th June, a tall
leafy poplar is set up in the market-place and burned.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 177 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In Cornwall <q>there was formerly a great bonfire on
midsummer-eve; a large summer pole was fixed in
the centre, round which the fuel was heaped up. It
had a large bush on the top of it.</q><note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, i. 318,
Bohn's ed.; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 178.</note> In Dublin on
May-morning boys used to go out and cut a May-bush,
bring it back to town, and then burn it.<note place='foot'>Hone, <hi rend='italic'>Every-day Book</hi>, ii. 595
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>B. K.</hi> p. 178.</note>
</p>

<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>

<p>
Probably the Boeotian festival belonged to the same
class of rites. It represented the marriage of the
powers of vegetation in spring or midsummer, just as
the same event is represented in modern Europe by
a King and Queen or a Lord and Lady of the May. In
the Boeotian, as in the Russian, ceremony the tree
dressed as a woman represents the English May-pole
and May-queen in one. All such ceremonies, it must
be remembered, are not, or at least were not originally,
mere spectacular or dramatic exhibitions. They are
magical charms designed to produce the effect which
they dramatically represent. If the revival of vegetation
in spring is represented by the awakening of a
sleeper, the representation is intended actually to
quicken the growth of leaves and blossoms; if the
marriage of the powers of vegetation is represented
by a King and Queen of May, the idea is that the
powers so represented will really be rendered more
productive by the ceremony. In short, all these spring
and midsummer festivals fall under the head of sympathetic
magic. The event which it is desired to bring
about is represented dramatically, and the very representation
is believed to effect, or at least to contribute
to, the production of the desired event. In the case
of the Daedala the story of Hera's quarrel with Zeus
and her sullen retirement may perhaps without straining
be interpreted as a mythical expression for a bad
season and the failure of the crops. The same disastrous
effects were attributed to the anger and seclusion
of Demeter after the loss of her daughter Proserpine.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, viii. 42.</note>
Now the institution of a festival is often explained by
a mythical story of the occurrence upon a particular
occasion of those very calamities which it is the real
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
object of the festival to avert; so that if we know the
myth told to account for the historical origin of the
festival, we can often infer from it the real intention
with which the festival was celebrated. If, therefore,
the origin of the Daedala was explained by a story of
a failure of crops and consequent famine, we may infer
that the real object of the festival was to prevent the
occurrence of such disasters; and, if I am right in my
interpretation of the festival, the object was supposed
to be effected by a dramatic representation of the
marriage of the divinities most concerned with the production
of vegetation.<note place='foot'>Once upon a time the Wotjaks of
Russia, being distressed by a series of
bad harvests, ascribed the calamity to
the wrath of one of their gods, <hi rend='italic'>Keremet</hi>,
at being unmarried. So they went in
procession to the sacred grove, riding
on gaily-decked waggons, as they do
when they are fetching home a bride.
At the sacred grove they feasted all
night, and next morning they cut in the
grove a square piece of turf which they
took home with them. <q>What they
meant by this marriage ceremony,</q> says
the writer who reports it, <q>it is not easy
to imagine. Perhaps, as Bechterew
thinks, they meant to marry <hi rend='italic'>Keremet</hi> to
the kindly and fruitful <foreign rend='italic'>mukyl'c in</foreign>, the
earth-wife, in order that she might influence
him for good.</q>&mdash;Max Buch, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Wotjäken, eine ethnologische Studie</hi>
(Stuttgart, 1882), p. 137.</note> The marriage of Zeus and Hera
was dramatically represented at annual festivals in
various parts of Greece,<note place='foot'>At Cnossus in Crete, Diodorus, v.
72; at Samos, Lactantius, <hi rend='italic'>Instit.</hi> i. 17;
at Athens, Photius, <hi rend='italic'>sv.</hi> ἱερὸν γάμον;
<hi rend='italic'>Etymolog. Magn.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>sv.</hi> ἱερομνήμονες, p.
468. 52.</note> and it is at least a fair conjecture
that the nature and intention of these ceremonies
were such as I have assigned to the Plataean festival
of the Daedala; in other words, that Zeus and Hera
at these festivals were the Greek equivalents of the
Lord and Lady of the May. Homer's glowing picture
of Zeus and Hera couched on fresh hyacinths and
crocuses,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, xiv. 347 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> like Milton's description of the dalliance
of Zephyr and Aurora, <q>as he met her once a-Maying,</q>
was perhaps painted from the life.
</p>

<p>
Still more confidently may the same character be
vindicated for the annual marriage at Athens of the
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
Queen to Dionysus in the Flowery Month (<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Anthesterion</foreign>)
of spring.<note place='foot'>Demosthenes, <hi rend='italic'>Neaer.</hi> § 73 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
p. 1369 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>svv.</hi> Διονύσου
γάμος and γεραραί; <hi rend='italic'>Etymol. Magn.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>sv.</hi> γεραῖραι; Pollux, viii. 108; Aug.
Mommsen, <hi rend='italic'>Heortologie</hi>, p. 357 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Hermann, <hi rend='italic'>Gottesdienstliche Alterthümer</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
§ 32. 15, § 58. 11 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> For Dionysus, as we shall see later
on, was essentially a god of vegetation, and the Queen
at Athens was a purely religious or priestly functionary.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>.</note>
Therefore at their annual marriage in spring he can
hardly have been anything but a King, and she a Queen,
of May. The women who attended the Queen at the
marriage ceremony would correspond to the bridesmaids
who wait on the May-queen.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>.</note> Again, the story, dear
to poets and artists, of the forsaken and sleeping
Ariadne waked and wedded by Dionysus, resembles so
closely the little drama acted by French peasants of the
Alps on May Day<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> that, considering the character of
Dionysus as a god of vegetation, we can hardly help
regarding it as the description of a spring ceremony
corresponding to the French one. In point of fact the
marriage of Dionysus and Ariadne is believed by
Preller to have been acted every spring in Crete.<note place='foot'>Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Griech. Mythol.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> i. 559.</note>
His evidence, indeed, is inconclusive, but the view
itself is probable. If I am right in instituting the
comparison, the chief difference between the French
and the Greek ceremonies must have been that in the
former the sleeper was the forsaken bridegroom, in the
latter the forsaken bride; and the group of stars in
the sky, in which fancy saw Ariadne's wedding-crown,<note place='foot'>Hyginus, <hi rend='italic'>Astronomica</hi>, i. 5.</note>
could only have been a translation to heaven of the
garland worn by the Greek girl who played the Queen
of May.
</p>

<p>
On the whole, alike from the analogy of modern
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
folk-custom and from the facts of ancient ritual and
mythology, we are justified in concluding that the
archaic forms of tree-worship disclosed by the spring
and midsummer festivals of our peasants were practised
by the Greeks and Romans in prehistoric times. Do
then these forms of tree-worship help to explain the
priesthood of Aricia, the subject of our inquiry? I
believe they do. In the first place the attributes of
Diana, the goddess of the Arician grove, are those of
a tree-spirit or sylvan deity. Her sanctuaries were in
groves, indeed every grove was her sanctuary,<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> iii.
332, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>nam, ut diximus, et omnis quercus
Jovi est consecrata, et omnis lucus
Dianae</foreign>.</note> and she
is often associated with the wood-god Silvanus in
inscriptions.<note place='foot'>Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Lexikon d. Griech. u.
Röm. Mythologie</hi>, c. 1005.</note> Like a tree-spirit, she helped women in
travail, and in this respect her reputation appears to
have stood high at the Arician grove, if we may judge
from the votive offerings found on the spot.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>. For Diana in this
character, see Roscher, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> c. 1007.</note> Again,
she was the patroness of wild animals;<note place='foot'>Roscher, c. 1006 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> just as in
Finland the wood-god Tapio was believed to care for
the wild creatures that roamed the wood, they being
considered his cattle.<note place='foot'>Castren, <hi rend='italic'>Finnische Mythologie</hi>, p. 97.</note> So, too, the Samogitians
deemed the birds and beasts of the woods sacred,
doubtless because they were under the protection of
the god of the wood.<note place='foot'>Mathias Michov, <q>De Sarmatia
Asiana atque Europea,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Novus Orbis
regionum ac insularum veteribus incognitarum</hi>,
p. 457.</note> Again, there are indications
that domestic cattle were protected by Diana,<note place='foot'>Livy, i. 45; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest.
Rom.</hi> 4.</note> as they
certainly were supposed to be by Silvanus.<note place='foot'>Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> viii. 600 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, with
Servius's note.</note> But
we have seen that special influence over cattle is
ascribed to wood-spirits; in Finland the herds enjoyed
the protection of the wood-gods both while they were
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
in their stalls and while they strayed in the forest.<note place='foot'>Castren, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 97 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Lastly, in the sacred spring which bubbled, and the
perpetual fire which seems to have burned in the
Arician grove,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> we may perhaps detect traces of other
attributes of forest gods, the power, namely, to make
the rain to fall and the sun to shine.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This last attribute
perhaps explains why Virbius, the companion
deity of Diana at Nemi, was by some believed to be
the sun.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Thus the cult of the Arician grove was essentially
that of a tree-spirit or wood deity. But our examination
of European folk-custom demonstrated that a tree-spirit
is frequently represented by a living person, who
is regarded as an embodiment of the tree-spirit and
possessed of its fertilising powers; and our previous
survey of primitive belief proved that this conception
of a god incarnate in a living man is common
among rude races. Further we have seen that the
living person who is believed to embody in himself
the tree-spirit is often called a king, in which
respect, again, he strictly represents the tree-spirit.
For the sacred cedar of the Gilgit tribes is called,
as we have seen, <q>the Dreadful King</q>;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>.</note> and
the chief forest god of the Finns, by name Tapio,
represented as an old man with a brown beard, a high
hat of fir-cones and a coat of tree-moss, was styled the
Wood King, Lord of the Woodland, Golden King of
the Wood.<note place='foot'>Castren, <hi rend='italic'>Finnische Mythologie</hi>, pp.
92, 95.</note> May not then the King of the Wood in
the Arician grove have been, like the King of May,
the Grass King, and the like, an incarnation of the
tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation? His title, his sacred
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
office, and his residence in the grove all point to this
conclusion, which is confirmed by his relation to the
Golden Bough. For since the King of the Wood
could only be assailed by him who had plucked the
Golden Bough, his life was safe from assault so long
as the bough or the tree on which it grew remained
uninjured. In a sense, therefore, his life was bound
up with that of the tree; and thus to some extent he
stood to the tree in the same relation in which the
incorporate or immanent tree-spirit stands to it. The
representation of the tree-spirit both by the King of
the Wood and by the Golden Bough (for it will hardly
be disputed that the Golden Bough was looked upon
as a very special manifestation of the divine life of the
grove) need not surprise us, since we have found that
the tree-spirit is not unfrequently thus represented in
double, first by a tree or a bough, and second by a
living person.
</p>

<p>
On the whole then, if we consider his double character
as king and priest, his relation to the Golden
Bough, and the strictly woodland character of the
divinity of the grove, we may provisionally assume
that the King of the Wood, like the May King and
his congeners of Northern Europe, was deemed a
living incarnation of the tree-spirit. As such he would
be credited with those miraculous powers of sending
rain and sunshine, making the crops to grow, women
to bring forth, and flocks and herds to multiply, which
are popularly ascribed to the tree-spirit itself. The
reputed possessor of powers so exalted must have been
a very important personage, and in point of fact his
influence appears to have extended far and wide. For<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Historic. Roman. Fragm.</hi> ed. Peter, p. 52 (first ed.)</note>
in the days when the champaign country around was
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
still parcelled out among the petty tribes who composed
the Latin League, the sacred grove on the
Alban Mountain is known to have been an object
of their common reverence and care. And just as
the kings of Cambodia used to send offerings to the
mystic Kings of Fire and Water far in the dim depths
of the tropical forest, so, we may well believe, from all
sides of the broad Latian plain the eyes and steps of
Italian pilgrims turned to the quarter where, standing
sharply out against the faint blue line of the Apennines
or the deeper blue of the distant sea, the Alban
Mountain rose before them, the home of the mysterious
priest of Nemi, the King of the Wood.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Perils Of The Soul.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>O liebe flüchtige Seele</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'><q rend='post'>Dir ist so bang und weh!</q></l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Heine.</hi>
</p>
</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. Royal and priestly taboos.'/>
<head>§ 1.&mdash;Royal and priestly taboos.</head>

<p>
In the preceding chapter we saw that in early
society the king or priest is often thought to be
endowed with supernatural powers or to be an incarnation
of a deity; in consequence of which the course
of nature is supposed to be more or less under his
control, and he is held responsible for bad weather,
failure of the crops, and similar calamities. Thus far
it appears to be assumed that the king's power over
nature, like that over his subjects and slaves, is
exerted through definite acts of will; and therefore
if drought, famine, pestilence, or storms arise, the
people attribute the misfortune to the negligence or
guilt of their king, and punish him accordingly with
stripes and bonds, or, if he remains obdurate, with
deposition and death. Sometimes, however, the course
of nature, while regarded as dependent on the king,
is supposed to be partly independent of his will. His
person is considered, if we may express it so, as the
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
dynamical centre of the universe, from which lines of
force radiate to all quarters of the heaven; so that any
motion of his&mdash;the turning of his head, the lifting of
his hand&mdash;instantaneously affects and may seriously
disturb some part of nature. He is the point of
support on which hangs the balance of the world;
and the slightest irregularity on his part may overthrow
the delicate equipoise. The greatest care must,
therefore, be taken both by and of him; and his whole
life, down to its minutest details, must be so regulated
that no act of his, voluntary or involuntary, may disarrange
or upset the established order of nature. Of
this class of monarchs the Mikado or Dairi, the
spiritual emperor of Japan, is a typical example. He
is an incarnation of the sun goddess, the deity who
rules the universe, gods and men included; once a
year all the gods wait upon him and spend a month
at his court. During that month, the name of which
means <q>without gods,</q> no one frequents the temples,
for they are believed to be deserted.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs of the Japanese
in the Nineteenth Century. From
recent Dutch Visitors to Japan, and the
German of Dr. Ph. Fr. von Siebold</hi>
(London, 1841), p. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The following description of the Mikado's mode of
life was written about two hundred years ago:<note place='foot'>Kaempfer, <q>History of Japan,</q>
in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>,
vii. 716 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>&mdash;
</p>

<p>
<q>Even to this day the princes descended of this
family, more particularly those who sit on the throne,
are looked upon as persons most holy in themselves,
and as Popes by birth. And, in order to preserve
these advantageous notions in the minds of their subjects,
they are obliged to take an uncommon care of
their sacred persons, and to do such things, which,
examined according to the customs of other nations,
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
would be thought ridiculous and impertinent. It will
not be improper to give a few instances of it. He
thinks that it would be very prejudicial to his dignity
and holiness to touch the ground with his feet; for this
reason, when he intends to go anywhere, he must
be carried thither on men's shoulders. Much less will
they suffer that he should expose his sacred person to
the open air, and the sun is not thought worthy to
shine on his head. There is such a holiness ascribed
to all the parts of his body, that he dares to cut off
neither his hair, nor his beard, nor his nails. However,
lest he should grow too dirty, they may clean
him in the night when he is asleep; because, they say,
that which is taken from his body at that time hath
been stolen from him, and that such a theft doth not
prejudice his holiness or dignity. In ancient times, he
was obliged to sit on the throne for some hours every
morning, with the imperial crown on his head, but to
sit altogether like a statue, without stirring either hands
or feet, head or eyes, nor indeed any part of his body,
because, by this means, it was thought that he could
preserve peace and tranquillity in his empire; for if,
unfortunately, he turned himself on one side or the
other, or if he looked a good while towards any part
of his dominions, it was apprehended that war, famine,
fire, or some great misfortune was near at hand to
desolate the country. But it having been afterwards
discovered that the imperial crown was the palladium
which by its mobility could preserve peace in the
empire, it was thought expedient to deliver his
imperial person, consecrated only to idleness and
pleasures, from this burthensome duty, and therefore
the crown is at present placed on the throne for some
hours every morning. His victuals must be dressed
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
every time in new pots, and served at table in new
dishes: both are very clean and neat, but made only
of common clay; that without any considerable expense
they may be laid aside, or broken, after they
have served once. They are generally broke, for fear
they should come into the hands of laymen, for they
believe religiously that if any layman should presume
to eat his food out of these sacred dishes, it would
swell and inflame his mouth and throat. The like ill
effect is dreaded from the Dairi's sacred habits; for
they believe that if a layman should wear them, without
the Emperor's express leave or command, they
would occasion swellings and pains in all parts of his
body.</q> To the same effect an earlier account of the
Mikado says: <q>It was considered as a shameful
degradation for him even to touch the ground with his
foot. The sun and moon were not even permitted to
shine upon his head. None of the superfluities of the
body were ever taken from him, neither his hair, his
beard, nor his nails were cut. Whatever he eat was
dressed in new vessels.</q><note place='foot'>Caron, <q>Account of Japan,</q> in
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, vii.
613. Compare Varenius, <hi rend='italic'>Descriptio
regni Japoniae</hi>, p. 11, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nunquam
attingebant (quemadmodum et hodie id
observat) pedes ipsius terram: radiis
Solis caput nunquam illustrabatur:
in apertum aërem non procedebat</foreign>, etc.</note>
</p>

<p>
Similar priestly or rather divine kings are found, at
a lower level of barbarism, on the west coast of Africa.
At Shark Point near Cape Padron, in Lower Guinea,
lives the priestly king Kukulu, alone in a wood. He
may not touch a woman nor leave his house; indeed
he may not even quit his chair, in which he is obliged
to sleep sitting, for if he lay down no wind would arise
and navigation would be stopped. He regulates
storms, and in general maintains a wholesome and
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
equable state of the atmosphere.<note place='foot'>A. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, i. 287 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, p. 353 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the kingdom of
Congo (West Africa) there was a supreme pontiff
called Chitomé or Chitombé, whom the negroes regarded
as a god on earth and all powerful in heaven.
Hence before they would taste the new crops they
offered him the first-fruits, fearing that manifold misfortunes
would befall them if they broke this rule.
When he left his residence to visit other places within
his jurisdiction, all married people had to observe strict
continence the whole time he was out; for it was supposed
that any act of incontinence would prove fatal
to him. And if he were to die a natural death, they
thought that the world would perish, and the earth,
which he alone sustained by his power and merit, would
immediately be annihilated.<note place='foot'>Labat, <hi rend='italic'>Relation historique de
l'Ethiopie Occidentale</hi>, i. 254 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Amongst the semi-barbarous
nations of the New World, at the date of
the Spanish conquest, there were found hierarchies
or theocracies like those of Japan. Some of these
we have already noticed.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>.</note> But the high pontiff of
the Zapotecs in Southern Mexico appears to have
presented a still closer parallel to the Mikado. A
powerful rival to the king himself, this spiritual lord
governed Yopaa, one of the chief cities of the kingdom,
with absolute dominion. It is impossible, we
are told, to over-rate the reverence in which he was
held. He was looked on as a god whom the earth
was not worthy to hold nor the sun to shine upon.
He profaned his sanctity if he even touched the
ground with his foot. The officers who bore his
palanquin on their shoulders were members of the
highest families; he hardly deigned to look on anything
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
around him; and all who met him fell with their
faces to the earth, fearing that death would overtake
them if they saw even his shadow. A rule of continence
was regularly imposed on the Zapotec priests, especially
upon the high pontiff; but <q>on certain days in each
year, which were generally celebrated with feasts and
dances, it was customary for the high priest to become
drunk. While in this state, seeming to belong neither
to heaven nor to earth, one of the most beautiful of the
virgins consecrated to the service of the gods was
brought to him.</q> If the child she bore him was a
son, he was brought up as a prince of the blood,
and the eldest son succeeded his father on the pontifical
throne.<note place='foot'>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. des nations civilisées du Mexique et de
l'Amérique-centrale</hi>, iii. 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the Pacific States</hi>, ii.
142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The supernatural powers attributed
to this pontiff are not specified, but probably they
resembled those of the Mikado and Chitomé.
</p>

<p>
Wherever, as in Japan and West Africa, it is
supposed that the order of nature, and even the existence
of the world, is bound up with the life of the
king or priest, it is clear that he must be regarded by
his subjects as a source both of infinite blessing and
of infinite danger. On the one hand, the people have
to thank him for the rain and sunshine which foster
the fruits of the earth, for the wind which brings ships
to their coasts, and even for the existence of the earth
beneath their feet. But what he gives he can
refuse; and so close is the dependence of nature on
his person, so delicate the balance of the system of
forces whereof he is the centre, that the slightest
irregularity on his part may set up a tremor which
shall shake the earth to its foundations. And
<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>
if nature may be disturbed by the slightest involuntary
act of the king, it is easy to conceive the
convulsion which his death might occasion. The
death of the Chitomé, as we have seen, was thought
to entail the destruction of the world. Clearly, therefore,
out of a regard for their own safety, which might
be imperilled by any rash act of the king, and still
more by his death, the people will exact of their king
or priest a strict conformity to those rules, the
observance of which is necessary for his own preservation,
and consequently for the preservation of
his people and the world. The idea that early
kingdoms are despotisms in which the people exist
only for the sovereign, is wholly inapplicable to the
monarchies we are considering. On the contrary,
the sovereign in them exists only for his subjects;
his life is only valuable so long as he discharges the
duties of his position by ordering the course of nature
for his people's benefit. So soon as he fails to do so
the care, the devotion, the religious homage which
they had hitherto lavished on him, cease and are
changed into hatred and contempt; he is dismissed
ignominiously, and may be thankful if he escapes with
his life. Worshipped as a god by them one day, he
is killed by them as a criminal the next. But in this
changed behaviour of the people there is nothing capricious
or inconsistent. On the contrary, their conduct
is entirely of a piece. If their king is their god, he is
or should be also their preserver; and if he will not
preserve them, he must make room for another who
will. So long, however, as he answers their expectations,
there is no limit to the care which they take of
him, and which they compel him to take of himself.
A king of this sort lives hedged in by a ceremonious
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
etiquette, a network of prohibitions and observances,
of which the intention is not to contribute to his
dignity, much less to his comfort, but to restrain him
from conduct which, by disturbing the harmony of
nature, might involve himself, his people, and the universe
in one common catastrophe. Far from adding to
his comfort, these observances, by trammelling his
every act, annihilate his freedom and often render the
very life, which it is their object to preserve, a burden
and sorrow to him.
</p>

<p>
Of the supernaturally endowed kings of Loango
it is said that the more powerful a king is, the
more taboos is he bound to observe; they regulate
all his actions, his walking and his standing, his
eating and drinking, his sleeping and waking.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, i. 355.</note> To
these restraints the heir to the throne is subject from
infancy; but as he advances in life the number of
abstinences and ceremonies which he must observe
increases, <q>until at the moment that he ascends the
throne he is lost in the ocean of rites and taboos.</q><note place='foot'>Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>,
p. 336.</note>
The kings of Egypt, as we have seen,<note place='foot'>P. <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> were worshipped
as gods, and the routine of their daily life was regulated
in every detail by precise and unvarying rules. <q>The
life of the kings of Egypt,</q> says Diodorus,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Bibl. Hist.</hi> i. 70.</note> <q>was not
like that of other monarchs who are irresponsible and
may do just what they choose; on the contrary, everything
was fixed for them by law, not only their official
duties, but even the details of their daily life.... The
hours both of day and night were arranged at which
the king had to do, not what he pleased, but what was
prescribed for him.... For not only were the times
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
appointed at which he should transact public business
or sit in judgment; but the very hours for his walking
and bathing and sleeping with his wife, and, in short,
performing every act of life, were all settled. Custom
enjoined a simple diet; the only flesh he might eat
was veal and goose, and he might only drink a prescribed
quantity of wine.</q> Of the taboos imposed on
priests, the rules of life observed by the Flamen Dialis
at Rome furnish a striking example. As the worship
of Virbius at Nemi was conducted, as we have seen,<note place='foot'>P. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</note>
by a Flamen, who may possibly have been the King
of the Wood himself, and whose mode of life may have
resembled that of the Roman Flamen, these rules have
a special interest for us. They were such as the
following: The Flamen Dialis might not ride or even
touch a horse, nor see an army under arms, nor wear
a ring which was not broken, nor have a knot on any
part of his garments; no fire except a sacred fire
might be taken out of his house; he might not
touch wheaten flour or leavened bread; he might not
touch or even name a goat, a dog, raw meat, beans,
and ivy; he might not walk under a vine; the feet of
his bed had to be daubed with mud; his hair could be
cut only by a free man and with a bronze knife, and
his hair and nails when cut had to be buried under a
lucky tree; he might not touch a dead body nor enter
a place where one was burned; he might not see work
being done on holy days; he might not be uncovered
in the open air; if a man in bonds were taken into his
house, he had to be unbound and the cords had to be
drawn up through a hole in the roof and so let down
into the street. His wife, the Flaminica, had to
observe nearly the same rules, and others of her own
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
besides. She might not ascend more than three steps
of the kind of staircase called Greek; at a certain
festival she might not comb her hair; the leather of
her shoes might not be made from a beast that had
died a natural death, but only from one that had been
slain or sacrificed; if she heard thunder she was
tabooed till she had offered an expiatory sacrifice.<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, x. 15; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Rom.</hi> 109-112; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat.
Hist.</hi> xxviii. 146; Servius on Virgil,
<hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> i. <hi rend='italic'>vv.</hi> 179, 448, iv. 518; Macrobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 16, 8 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Festus,
p. 161 A, ed. Müller. For more details
see Marquardt, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Staatsverwaltung</hi>,
iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 326 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The burdensome observances attached to the royal
or priestly office produced their natural effect. Either
men refused to accept the office, which hence tended
to fall into abeyance; or accepting it, they sank under
its weight into spiritless creatures, cloistered recluses,
from whose nerveless fingers the reigns of government
slipped into the firmer grasp of men who
were often content to wield the reality of sovereignty
without its name. In some countries this rift in the
supreme power deepened into a total and permanent
separation of the spiritual and temporal powers, the old
royal house retaining their purely religious functions,
while the civil government passed into the hands of a
younger and more vigorous race.
</p>

<p>
To take examples. We saw<note place='foot'>P. <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>.</note> that in Cambodia
it is often necessary to force the kingships of Fire
and Water upon the reluctant successors, and that
in Savage Island the monarchy actually came to an
end because at last no one could be induced to
accept the dangerous distinction.<note place='foot'>P. <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>.</note> In some parts of
West Africa, when the king dies, a family council
is secretly held to determine his successor. He on
whom the choice falls is suddenly seized, bound, and
<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>
thrown into the fetish-house, where he is kept in
durance till he consents to accept the crown. Sometimes
the heir finds means of evading the honour which
it is sought to thrust upon him; a ferocious chief has
been known to go about constantly armed, resolute to
resist by force any attempt to set him on the throne.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, i. 354 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; ii.
9, 11.</note>
The Mikados of Japan seem early to have resorted to
the expedient of transferring the honours and burdens
of supreme power to their infant children; and the rise
of the Tycoons, long the temporal sovereigns of the
country, is traced to the abdication of a certain Mikado
in favour of his three-year-old son. The sovereignty
having been wrested by a usurper from the infant
prince, the cause of the Mikado was championed by
Yoritomo, a man of spirit and conduct, who overthrew
the usurper and restored to the Mikado the shadow,
while he retained for himself the substance, of power.
He bequeathed to his descendants the dignity he had
won, and thus became the founder of the line of Tycoons.
Down to the latter half of the sixteenth century the
Tycoons were active and efficient rulers; but the same
fate overtook them which had befallen the Mikados;
entangled in the same inextricable web of custom and
law, they degenerated into mere puppets, hardly stirring
from their palaces and occupied in a perpetual round
of empty ceremonies, while the real business of government
was managed by the council of state.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs of the Japanese</hi>,
pp. 199 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> 355 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In Tonquin
the monarchy ran a similar course. Living like
his predecessors in effeminacy and sloth, the king was
driven from the throne by an ambitious adventurer
named Mack, who from a fisherman had risen to be
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
Grand Mandarin. But the king's brother Tring
put down the usurper and restored the king, retaining,
however, for himself and his descendants
the dignity of general of all the forces. Thenceforward
the kings or <foreign rend='italic'>dovas</foreign>, though vested with the title
and pomp of sovereignty, ceased to govern. While
they lived secluded in their palaces, all real political
power was wielded by the hereditary generals or
<foreign rend='italic'>chovas</foreign>.<note place='foot'>Richard, <q>History of Tonquin,</q>
in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, ix.
744 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The custom regularly observed by the Tahitian
kings of abdicating on the birth of a son, who was
immediately proclaimed sovereign and received his
father's homage, may perhaps have originated, like the
similar custom occasionally practised by the Mikados,
in a wish to shift to other shoulders the irksome burden
of royalty; for in Tahiti as elsewhere the sovereign
was subjected to a system of vexatious restrictions.<note place='foot'>Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>, iii.
99 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> ed. 1836.</note>
In Mangaia, another Polynesian island, religious and
civil authority were lodged in separate hands, spiritual
functions being discharged by a line of hereditary kings,
while the temporal government was entrusted from
time to time to a victorious war-chief, whose investiture,
however, had to be completed by the king. To the
latter were assigned the best lands, and he received
daily offerings of the choicest food.<note place='foot'>Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Songs of the South
Pacific</hi>, p. 293 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> American examples
of the partition of authority between an
emperor and a pope have already been cited from the
early history of Mexico and Colombia.<note place='foot'>Pp. <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>.</note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. The nature of the soul.'/>
<head>§ 2.&mdash;The nature of the soul.</head>

<p>
But if the object of the taboos observed by a
divine king or priest is to preserve his life, the question
arises, How is their observance supposed to effect this
end? To understand this we must know the nature
of the danger which threatens the king's life, and which
it is the intention of the taboos to guard against. We
must, therefore, ask: What does early man understand
by death? To what causes does he attribute it?
And how does he think it may be guarded against?
</p>

<p>
As the savage commonly explains the processes of
inanimate nature by supposing that they are produced
by living beings working in or behind the phenomena,
so he explains the phenomena of life itself. If an
animal lives and moves, it can only be, he thinks, because
there is a little animal inside which moves it.
If a man lives and moves, it can only be because he
has a little man inside who moves him. The animal
inside the animal, the man inside the man, is the
soul. And as the activity of an animal or man is
explained by the presence of the soul, so the repose
of sleep or death is explained by its absence; sleep
or trance being the temporary, death being the
permanent absence of the soul. Hence if death be
the permanent absence of the soul, the way to guard
against it is either to prevent the soul from leaving
the body, or, if it does depart, to secure that it shall
return. The precautions adopted by savages to secure
one or other of these ends take the form of prohibitions
or taboos, which are nothing but rules intended
to ensure either the continued presence or the return
of the soul. In short, they are life-preservers or life-guards.
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
These general statements will now be illustrated
by examples.
</p>

<p>
Addressing some Australian blacks, a European
missionary said, <q>I am not one, as you think, but two.</q>
Upon this they laughed. <q>You may laugh as much
as you like,</q> continued the missionary, <q>I tell you that
I am two in one; this great body that you see is one;
within that there is another little one which is not
visible. The great body dies, and is buried, but the
little body flies away when the great one dies.</q> To
this some of the blacks replied, <q>Yes, yes. We also
are two, we also have a little body within the breast.</q>
On being asked where the little body went after death,
some said it went behind the bush, others said it went
into the sea, and some said they did not know.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological Institute</hi>,
vii. 282.</note> The
Hurons thought that the soul had a head and body,
arms and legs; in short, that it was a complete little
model of the man himself.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jesuites</hi>, 1634, p. 17;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, 1636, p. 104; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, 1639, p. 43
(Canadian reprint).</note> The Eskimos believe that
<q>the soul exhibits the same shape as the body it
belongs to, but is of a more subtle and ethereal nature.</q><note place='foot'>H. Rink, <hi rend='italic'>Tales and Traditions of
the Eskimo</hi>, p. 36.</note>
So exact is the resemblance of the mannikin to the
man, in other words, of the soul to the body, that, as
there are fat bodies and thin bodies, so there are fat
souls and thin souls;<note place='foot'>Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Songs of the South
Pacific</hi>, p. 171.</note> as there are heavy bodies and
light bodies, long bodies and short bodies, so there are
heavy souls and light souls, long souls and short souls.
The people of Nias (an island to the west of Sumatra)
think that every man, before he is born, is asked how
long or how heavy a soul he would like, and a soul of
the desired weight or length is measured out to him.
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
The heaviest soul ever given out weighs about ten
grammes. The length of a man's life is proportioned
to the length of his soul; children who die young had
short souls.<note place='foot'>H. Sundermann, <q>Die Insel Nias
und die Mission daselbst,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine
Missions-Zeitschrift</hi>, bd. xi.
October 1884, p. 453.</note> Sometimes, however, as we shall see, the
human soul is conceived not in human but in animal
form.
</p>

<p>
The soul is commonly supposed to escape by the
natural openings of the body, especially the mouth and
nostrils. Hence in Celebes they sometimes fasten fish-hooks
to a sick man's nose, navel, and feet, so that if
his soul should try to escape it may be hooked and
held fast.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Over de Bissoes of
heidensche priesters en priesteressen der
Boeginezen</hi>, p. 24.</note> One of the <q>properties</q> of a Haida
medicine-man is a hollow bone, in which he bottles up
departing souls, and so restores them to their owners.<note place='foot'>G. M. Dawson, <q>On the Haida
Indians of the Queen Charlotte Islands,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Geological Survey of Canada,
Report of Progress for 1878-1879</hi>, pp.
123 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, 139 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note>
The Marquesans used to hold the mouth and nose of
a dying man, in order to keep him in life, by preventing
his soul from escaping.<note place='foot'>Waitz, <hi rend='italic'>Anthropologie der Naturvölker</hi>,
vi. 397 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When any one yawns
in their presence the Hindus always snap their thumbs,
believing that this will hinder the soul from issuing
through the open mouth.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. No.
665.</note> The Itonamas in South
America seal up the eyes, nose, and mouth of a dying
person, in case his ghost should get out and carry off
other people.<note place='foot'>D'Orbigny, <hi rend='italic'>L'Homme Américain</hi>,
ii. 241; <hi rend='italic'>Transact. Ethnol. Soc. of
London</hi>, iii. 322 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Culturländer
des alten Amerika</hi>, i. 476.</note> In Southern Celebes, to prevent the
escape of a woman's soul at childbirth, the nurse ties a
band as tightly as possible round the body of the expectant
mother.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot
de Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</hi>, p.
54.</note> And lest the soul of the babe should
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
escape and be lost as soon as it is born, the Alfoers
of Celebes, when a birth is about to take place, are
careful to close every opening in the house, even the
keyhole; and they stop up every chink and cranny in
the walls. Also they tie up the mouths of all animals
inside and outside the house, for fear one of them
might swallow the child's soul. For a similar reason
all persons present in the house, even the mother
herself, are obliged to keep their mouths shut the
whole time the birth is taking place. When the
question was put, Why they did not hold their noses
also, lest the child's soul should get into one of them?
the answer was that breath being exhaled as well as
inhaled through the nostrils, the soul would be expelled
before it could have time to settle down.<note place='foot'>Zimmermann, <hi rend='italic'>Die Inseln des Indischen
und Stillen Meeres</hi>, ii. 386 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Often the soul is conceived as a bird ready to take
flight. This conception has probably left traces in
most languages,<note place='foot'>Cp. the Greek ποτάομαι, ἀναπτερόω,
etc.</note> and it lingers as a metaphor in poetry.
But what is metaphor to a modern European poet
was sober earnest to his savage ancestor, and is still
so to many people. The Malays carry out the
conception in question to its practical conclusion. If
the soul is a bird on the wing, it may be attracted by
rice, and so prevented from taking its perilous flight.
Thus in Java when a child is placed on the ground for
the first time (a moment which uncultured people seem
to regard as especially dangerous), it is put in a hen-coop
and the mother makes a clucking sound, as if she
were calling hens.<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <q>Het animisme
bij de volken van den Indischen
Archipel,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>De Indische Gids</hi>, June
1884, p. 944.</note> Amongst the Battas of Sumatra,
when a man returns from a dangerous enterprise, grains
of rice are placed on his head, and these grains are
<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>
called <foreign rend='italic'>padiruma tondi</foreign>, that is, <q>means to make the soul
(<foreign rend='italic'>tondi</foreign>) stay at home.</q> In Java also rice is placed on
the head of persons who have escaped a great danger
or have returned home unexpectedly after it had been
supposed that they were lost.<note place='foot'>Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> In Celebes they
think that a bridegroom's soul is apt to fly away at
marriage, so coloured rice is scattered over him to
induce it to stay. And, in general, at festivals in
South Celebes rice is strewed on the head of the
person in whose honour the festival is held, with the
object of detaining his soul, which at such times is
in especial danger of being lured away by envious
demons.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</hi>, p. 33; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Over de Bissoes of heidensche priesters
en priesteressen der Boeginezen</hi>, p. 9 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Makassaarsch-Hollandsch Woordenboek</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>svv.</hi> <foreign rend='italic'>Koêrróe</foreign> and <foreign rend='italic'>soemāñgá</foreign>, pp.
41, 569. Of these two words, the
former means the sound made in calling
fowls, and the latter means the soul. The
expression for the ceremonies described
in the text is <foreign rend='italic'>ápakoêrróe soemāñgá</foreign>.</note>
</p>

<p>
The soul of a sleeper is supposed to wander away
from his body and actually to visit the very places of
which he dreams. But this absence of the soul has its
dangers, for if from any cause it should be permanently
detained away from the body, the person, deprived of
his soul, must die.<note place='foot'>Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman, his Life
and Notions</hi>, ii. 100.</note> Many causes may detain the
sleeper's soul. Thus, his soul may meet the soul of
another sleeper and the two souls may fight; if a
Guinea negro wakens with sore bones in the morning,
he thinks that his soul has been thrashed by another
soul in sleep.<note place='foot'>J. L. Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>West Afrika</hi>, p. 162
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (German translation).</note> Or it may meet the soul of a person
just deceased and be carried off by it; hence in the
Aru Islands the inmates of a house will not sleep the
night after a death has taken place in it, because the
soul of the deceased is supposed to be still in the house
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
and they fear to meet it in a dream.<note place='foot'>J. G. F. Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes en
Papua</hi>, p. 267. For detention of
sleeper's soul by spirits and consequent
illness, see also Mason, quoted in
Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen Asien</hi>,
ii. 387 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> Again, the soul
may be prevented by physical force from returning.
The Santals tell how a man fell asleep, and growing
very thirsty, his soul, in the form of a lizard, left his
body and entered a pitcher of water to drink. Just
then the owner of the pitcher happened to cover it;
so the soul could not return to the body and the man
died. While his friends were preparing to burn the
body some one uncovered the pitcher to get water.
The lizard thus escaped and returned to the body,
which immediately revived; so the man rose up and
asked his friends why they were weeping. They told
him they thought he was dead and were about to burn
his body. He said he had been down a well to get
water but had found it hard to get out and had just
returned. So they saw it all.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, 1878, vii.
273; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Völkerstämme am
Brahmaputra</hi>, p. 127. Similar story
(lizard form of soul not mentioned) told
by Hindus, <hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>,
iii. No. 679.</note> A similar story is
reported from Transylvania as follows. In the account
of a witch's trial at Mühlbach last century it is said
that a woman had engaged two men to work in her
vineyard. After noon they all lay down to rest as
usual. An hour later the men got up and tried to
waken the woman, but could not. She lay motionless
with her mouth wide open. They came back at sunset
and still she lay like a corpse. Just at that moment
a big fly came buzzing past, which one of the men
caught and shut up in his leathern pouch. Then
they tried again to waken the woman but could not.
Afterwards they let out the fly; it flew straight into
the woman's mouth and she awoke. On seeing
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
this the men had no further doubt that she was
a witch.<note place='foot'>E. Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>The Land beyond the
Forest</hi>, ii. 27 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> A similar story is told
in Holland, J. W. Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Nederlandsche
Sagen</hi>, No. 251, p. 344 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The stories
of Hermotimus and King Gunthram
belong to the same class. In the
latter the king's soul comes out of
his mouth as a small reptile. The
soul of Aristeas issued from his
mouth in the form of a raven.
Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> vii. § 174;
Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Muse. Encom.</hi> 7; Paulus,
<hi rend='italic'>Hist. Langobardorum</hi>, iii. 34. In
an East Indian story of the same
type the sleeper's soul issues from
his nose in the form of a cricket.
Wilken in <hi rend='italic'>De Indische Gids</hi>, June
1884, p. 940. In a Swabian story
a girl's soul creeps out of her mouth
in the form of a white mouse. Birlinger,
<hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches aus Schwaben</hi>,
i. 303.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is a common rule with primitive people not to
waken a sleeper, because his soul is away and might
not have time to get back; so if the man wakened
without his soul, he would fall sick. If it is
absolutely necessary to waken a sleeper, it must be
done very gradually, to allow the soul time to
return.<note place='foot'>Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman</hi>, ii.
103; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, ii. 389; Blumentritt, <q>Der
Ahnencultus und die religiösen
Anschauungen der Malaien des
Philippinen-Archipels,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen
d. Wiener Geogr. Gesellschaft</hi>,
1882, p. 209; Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en
kroesharige rassen tusschen Selebes
en Papua</hi>, p. 440; id., <q>Die Landschaft
Dawan oder West-Timor,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Geographische Blätter</hi>, x. 280.</note> In Bombay it is thought equivalent to
murder to change the appearance of a sleeper, as
by painting his face in fantastic colours or giving
moustaches to a sleeping woman. For when the
soul returns, it will not be able to recognise its
body and the person will die.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, iii.
No. 530.</note> The Servians believe
that the soul of a sleeping witch often leaves her body
in the form of a butterfly. If during its absence her
body be turned round, so that her feet are placed
where her head was before, the butterfly soul will not
find its way back into her body through the mouth,
and the witch will die.<note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian
People</hi>, p. 117 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
But in order that a man's soul should quit his
body, it is not necessary that he should be asleep.
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
It may quit him in his waking hours, and then
sickness or (if the absence is prolonged) death will
be the result. Thus the Mongols sometimes
explain sickness by supposing that the patient's
soul is absent, and either does not care to return
to its body or cannot find the way back. To
secure the return of the soul it is therefore necessary
on the one hand to make its body as
attractive as possible, and on the other hand to
show it the way home. To make the body attractive
all the sick man's best clothes and most
valued possessions are placed beside him; he
is washed, incensed, and made as comfortable as
possible; and all his friends march thrice round the
hut calling out the sick man's name and coaxing
his soul to return. To help the soul to find its way
back a coloured cord is stretched from the patient's
head to the door of the hut. The priest in his
robes reads a list of the horrors of hell and the
dangers incurred by souls which wilfully absent
themselves from their bodies. Then turning to the
assembled friends and the patient he asks, <q>Is it
come?</q> All answer Yes, and bowing to the returning
soul throw seed over the sick man. The
cord which guided the soul back is then rolled up
and placed round the patient's neck, who must wear
it for seven days without taking it off. No one
may frighten or hurt him, lest his soul, not yet
familiar with its body, should again take flight.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Seele und ihre Erscheinungwesen in der Ethnographie</hi>, p. 36.</note> In
an Indian story a king conveys his soul into the dead
body of a Brahman, and a hunchback conveys his soul
into the deserted body of the king. The hunchback
is now king and the king is a Brahman. However,
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
the hunchback is induced to show his skill by transferring
his soul to the dead body of a parrot, and the
king seizes the opportunity to regain possession of
his own body.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Pantschatantra</hi>, Benfey, p. 124 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In another Indian story a Brahman
reanimates the dead body of a king by conveying
his own soul into it. Meantime the Brahman's
body has been burnt, and his soul is obliged to remain
in the body of the king.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Katha Sarit Ságara</hi>, trans. Tawney,
i. 21 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The departure of the soul is not always voluntary.
It may be extracted from the body against its
will by ghosts, demons, or sorcerers. Hence, when
a funeral is passing the house, the Karens of Burma
tie their children with a special kind of string to a
particular part of the house, in case the souls of
the children should leave their bodies and go into
the corpse which is passing. The children are
kept tied in this way until the corpse is out of sight.<note place='foot'>E. B. Cross, <q>On the Karens,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the American Oriental
Society</hi>, iv. 311.</note>
And after the corpse has been laid in the grave, but
before the earth has been filled in, the mourners and
friends range themselves round the grave, each
with a bamboo split lengthwise in one hand and a
little stick in the other; each man thrusts his bamboo
into the grave, and drawing the stick along the
groove of the bamboo points out to his soul that
in this way it may easily climb up out of the grave.
While the earth is being filled in, the bamboos are
kept out of the way, lest the souls should be in
them, and so should be inadvertently buried with
the earth as it is being thrown into the grave; and
when the people leave the spot they carry away
the bamboos, begging their souls to come with
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
them.<note place='foot'>A. R. M'Mahon, <hi rend='italic'>The Karens of
the Golden Chersonese</hi>, p. 318.</note> Further, on returning from the grave each
Karen provides himself with three little hooks made
of branches of trees, and calling his spirit to follow
him, at short intervals, as he returns, he makes a
motion as if hooking it, and then thrusts the hook
into the ground. This is done to prevent the soul
of the living from staying behind with the soul of
the dead.<note place='foot'>F. Mason, <q>Physical Character of
the Karens,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Asiatic
Society of Bengal</hi>, 1866, pt. ii. p. 28 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When a mother dies leaving a young
baby, the Burmese think that the <q>butterfly</q> or
soul of the baby follows that of the mother, and that
if it is not recovered the child must die. So a wise
woman is called in to get back the baby's soul. She
places a mirror near the corpse, and on the mirror a
piece of feathery cotton down. Holding a cloth in
her open hands at the foot of the mirror, she with wild
words entreats the mother not to take with her the
<q>butterfly</q> or soul of her child, but to send it back.
As the gossamer down slips from the face of the
mirror she catches it in the cloth and tenderly places
it on the baby's breast. The same ceremony is sometimes
observed when one of two children that have
played together dies, and is thought to be luring away
the soul of its playmate to the spirit-land. It is sometimes
performed also for a bereaved husband or wife.<note place='foot'>C. J. S. F. Forbes, <hi rend='italic'>British
Burma</hi>, p. 99 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The
Burman</hi>, ii. 102; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Völker des östlichen Asien</hi>, ii. 389.</note>
In the Island of Keisar (East Indies) it is thought imprudent
to go near a grave at night, lest the ghosts
should catch and keep the soul of the passer-by.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>,
p. 414.</note> The
Key Islanders believe that the souls of their forefathers,
angry at not receiving food, make people sick
by detaining their souls. So they lay offerings of food
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
on the grave and beg their ancestors to allow the
soul of the sick to return or to drive it home speedily
if it should be lingering by the way.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 221 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In Bolang Mongondo, a district in the west of
Celebes, all sickness is ascribed to the ancestral spirits
who have carried off the patient's soul. The object
therefore is to bring back the patient's soul and restore
it to the sufferer. An eye-witness has thus described
the attempted cure of a sick boy. The priestesses,
who acted as physicians, made a doll of cloth and
fastened it to the point of a spear, which an old woman
held upright. Round this doll the priestesses danced,
uttering charms, and chirruping as when one calls a
dog. Then the old woman lowered the point of the
spear a little, so that the priestesses could reach the
doll. By this time the soul of the sick boy was supposed
to be in the doll, having been brought into it by
the incantations. So the priestesses approached it
cautiously on tiptoe and caught the soul in the many-coloured
cloths which they had been waving in the air.
Then they laid the soul on the boy's head, that is, they
wrapped his head in the cloth in which the soul was
supposed to be, and stood still for some moments with
great gravity, holding their hands on the patient's
head. Suddenly there was a jerk, the priestesses
whispered and shook their heads, and the cloth was
taken off&mdash;the soul had escaped. The priestesses
gave chase to it, running round and round the house,
clucking and gesticulating as if they were driving hens
into a poultry-yard. At last they recaptured the soul
at the foot of the stair and restored it to its owner
as before.<note place='foot'>N. Ph. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz,
<q>Het heidendom en de Islam in
Bolaang Mongondou,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
1867, xi. 263 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Much in the same way an Australian
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
medicine-man will sometimes bring the lost soul of a
sick man into a puppet and restore it to the patient by
pressing the puppet to his breast.<note place='foot'>James Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
p. 57 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Uea, one of the
Loyalty Islands, the souls of the dead seem to have
been credited with the power of stealing the souls of
the living. For when a man was sick the soul-doctor
would go with a large troop of men and women to the
graveyard. Here the men played on flutes and the
women whistled softly to lure the soul home. After
this had gone on for some time they formed in procession
and moved homewards, the flutes playing and
the women whistling all the way, leading back the
wandering soul and driving it gently along with open
palms. On entering the patient's dwelling they commanded
the soul in a loud voice to enter his body.<note place='foot'>W. W. Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Songs of
the South Pacific</hi>, p. 171 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In Madagascar, when a sick man had lost his soul, his
friends went to the family tomb, and making a hole in
it, begged the soul of the patient's father to give them
a soul for his son, who had none. So saying they
clapped a bonnet on the hole, and folding up the soul
in the bonnet, brought it to the patient, who put the
bonnet on his head, and thus received a new soul or
got back his old one.<note place='foot'>G. A. Wilken, <q>Het animisme,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>De Indische Gids</hi>, June 1884, p.
937.</note>
</p>

<p>
Often the abduction of a man's soul is set down to
demons. The Annamites believe that when a man
meets a demon and speaks to him, the demon inhales
the man's breath and soul.<note place='foot'>Landes, <q>Contes et légendes annamites,</q>
No. 76 in <hi rend='italic'>Cochinchine Française,
Excursions et Reconnaissances</hi>, No. 23,
p. 80.</note> When a Dyak is about to
leave a forest through which he has been walking
alone, he never forgets to ask the demons to give him
back his soul, for it may be that some forest-devil has
<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>
carried it off. For the abduction of a soul may take
place without its owner being aware of his loss, and it
may happen either while he is awake or asleep.<note place='foot'>Perelaer, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische Beschrijving
der Dajaks</hi>, p. 26 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
the Moluccas when a man is unwell it is thought that
some devil has carried away his soul to the tree,
mountain, or hill where he (the devil) dwells. A sorcerer
having pointed out the devil's abode, the friends
of the patient carry thither cooked rice, fruit, fish, raw
eggs, a hen, a chicken, a silken robe, gold, armlets,
etc. Having set out the food in order they pray,
saying: <q>We come to offer to you, O devil, this offering
of food, clothes, gold, etc.; take it and release the
soul of the patient for whom we pray. Let it return
to his body and he who now is sick shall be made
whole.</q> Then they eat a little and let the hen loose
as a ransom for the soul of the patient; also they put
down the raw eggs; but the silken robe, the gold, and
the armlets they take home with them. As soon as
they are come to the house they place a flat bowl containing
the offerings which have been brought back at
the sick man's head, and say to him: <q>Now is your
soul released, and you shall fare well and live to gray
hairs on the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Fr. Valentyn, <hi rend='italic'>Oud en nieuw Oost-Indien</hi>,
iii. 13 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A more modern account from
the same region describes how the friend of the
patient, after depositing his offerings on the spot where
the missing soul is supposed to be, calls out thrice the
name of the sick person, adding, <q>Come with me,
come with me.</q> Then he returns, making a motion
with a cloth as if he had caught the soul in it. He
must not look to right or left or speak a word to any
one he meets, but must go straight to the patient's
house. At the door he stands, and calling out the sick
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
person's name, asks whether he is returned. Being
answered from within that he is returned, he enters
and lays the cloth in which he has caught the soul on
the patient's throat, saying, <q>Now you are returned to
the house.</q> Sometimes a substitute is provided; a
doll, dressed up in gay clothing and tinsel, is offered to
the demon in exchange for the patient's soul with these
words, <q>Give us back the ugly one which you have
taken away and receive this pretty one instead.</q><note place='foot'>Van Schmidt, <q>Aanteekeningen,
nopens de zeden, gewoonten en gebruiken,
benevens de vooroordeelen en bijgelovigheden
der bevolking van de
eilanden Saparoea, Haroekoe, Noessa
Laut, en van een gedeelte van de zuidkust
van Ceram,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor
Neêrland's Indie</hi>, 1843, dl. ii. 511 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Similarly the Mongols make up a horse of birch-bark
and a doll, and invite the demon to take the doll
instead of the patient and to ride away on the horse.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Seele</hi>, p. 36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. G.
Gmelin, <hi rend='italic'>Reise durch Sibirien</hi>, ii. 359
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Demons are especially feared by persons who have
just entered on a new house. Hence at a house-warming
among the Alfoers of Celebes the priest
performs a ceremony for the purpose of restoring
their souls to the inmates. He hangs up a bag at the
place of sacrifice and then goes through a list of the
gods. There are so many of them that this takes
him the whole night through without stopping. In
the morning he offers the gods an egg and some rice.
By this time the souls of the household are supposed to
be gathered in the bag. So the priest takes the bag,
and holding it on the head of the master of the house
says, <q>Here you have your soul&mdash;go (soul) to-morrow
away again.</q> He then does the same, saying the same
words, to the housewife and all the other members of
the family.<note place='foot'>P. N. Wilken, <q>Bijdragen tot de
kennis van de zeden en gewoonten der
Alfoeren in de Minahassa,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, 1863, vii. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Why the priest, after restoring the soul,
tells it to go away again, is not clear.</note> Amongst the same Alfoers one way of
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
recovering a sick man's soul is to let down a bowl
by a belt out of a window and fish for the soul till
it is caught in the bowl and hauled up.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <q>De Minahassa in 1825,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde</hi>, xviii. 523.</note> Among
the same people, when a priest is bringing back a
sick man's soul which he has caught in a cloth,
he is preceded by a girl holding the large leaf of a
certain palm over his head as an umbrella to keep
him and the soul from getting wet, in case it should
rain; and he is followed by a man brandishing a
sword to deter other souls from any attempt at
rescuing the captured soul.<note place='foot'>N. Graafland, <hi rend='italic'>De Minahassa</hi>, i.
327 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The Samoans tell how two young wizards, passing
a house where a chief lay very sick, saw a
company of gods from the mountain sitting in the
doorway. They were handing from one to another
the soul of the dying chief. It was wrapped in
a leaf, and had been passed from the gods inside
the house to those sitting in the doorway. One of
the gods handed the soul to one of the wizards,
taking him for a god in the dark, for it was night.
Then all the gods rose up and went away; but the
wizard kept the chief's soul. In the morning some
women went with a present of fine mats to fetch a
famous physician. The wizards were sitting on the
shore as the women passed, and they said to the
women, <q>Give us the mats and we will heal him.</q>
So they went to the chief's house. He was very ill,
his jaw hung down, and his end seemed near. But
the wizards undid the leaf and let the soul into him
again, and forthwith he brightened up and lived.<note place='foot'>G. Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The Battas of Sumatra believe that the soul of a
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
living man may transmigrate into the body of an
animal. Hence, for example, the doctor is sometimes
desired to extract the patient's soul from the body
of a fowl, in which it has been hidden away by an evil
spirit.<note place='foot'>J. B. Neumann, <q>Het Pane en
Bila-stroomgebied op het eiland
Sumatra,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het
Nederlandsch Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>,
ii. de Serie, dl. iii., Afdeeling:
meer uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2
(1886), p. 302.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes the lost soul is brought back in a
visible shape. In Melanesia a woman knowing that
a neighbour was at the point of death heard a rustling
in her house, as of a moth fluttering, just at
the moment when a noise of weeping and lamentation
told her that the soul was flown. She caught
the fluttering thing between her hands and ran
with it, crying out that she had caught the soul.
But though she opened her hands above the
mouth of the corpse, it did not revive.<note place='foot'>Codrington, <q>Religious Beliefs and
Practices in Melanesia,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of
the Anthropological Institute</hi>, x. 281.</note> The
Salish or Flathead Indians of Oregon believe that
a man's soul may be separated for a time from his
body without causing death and without the man
being aware of his loss. It is necessary, however,
that the lost soul should be soon found and restored
to the man or he will die. The name of the man who
has lost his soul is revealed in a dream to the
medicine-man, who hastens to inform the sufferer of
his loss. Generally a number of men have sustained
a like loss at the same time; all their names are
revealed to the medicine-man, and all employ him to
recover their souls. The whole night long these
soulless men go about the village from lodge to lodge,
dancing and singing. Towards daybreak they go
into a separate lodge, which is closed up so as to be
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
totally dark. A small hole is then made in the roof,
through which the medicine-man, with a bunch of
feathers, brushes in the souls, in the shape of bits of
bone and the like, which he receives on a piece of
matting. A fire is next kindled, by the light of which
the medicine-man sorts out the souls. First he puts
aside the souls of dead people, of which there are
usually several; for if he were to give the soul of a
dead person to a living man, the man would die
instantly. Next he picks out the souls of all the
persons present, and making them all to sit down
before him, he takes the soul of each, in the shape of
a splinter of bone, wood, or shell, and placing it on
the owner's head, pats it with many prayers and
contortions till it descends into the heart and so
resumes its proper place.<note place='foot'>Horatio Hale, <hi rend='italic'>U.S. Exploring
Expedition, Ethnography and Philology</hi>,
p. 208 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Cp. Wilkes, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the
U.S. Exploring Expedition</hi> (London,
1845), iv. 448 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Amboina the sorcerer,
to recover a soul detained by demons, plucks a branch
from a tree, and waving it to and fro as if to catch
something, calls out the sick man's name. Returning
he strikes the patient over the head and body with
the branch, into which the lost soul is supposed to
have passed, and from which it returns to the patient.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, p.
77 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
In the Babar Islands offerings for evil spirits are
laid at the root of a great tree (<foreign rend='italic'>wokiorai</foreign>), from which
a leaf is plucked and pressed on the patient's forehead
and breast; the lost soul, which is in the leaf, is thus
restored to its owner.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 356 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some other islands of the
same seas, when a man returns ill and speechless from
the forest, it is inferred that the evil spirits which
dwell in the great trees have caught and kept his
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
soul. Offerings of food are therefore left under a tree
and the soul is brought home in a piece of wax.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 376.</note>
Amongst the Dyaks of Sarawak the priest conjures
the lost soul into a cup, where it is seen by the
uninitiated as a lock of hair, but by the initiated as a
miniature human being. This is supposed to be
thrust by the priest into a hole in the top of the
patient's head.<note place='foot'>Spenser St. John, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the
Forests of the Far East</hi>, i. 189. Sometimes
the souls resemble cotton seeds
(<hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi>) Cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> i. 183.</note> In Nias the sick man's soul is
restored to him in the shape of a firefly, visible only
to the sorcerer, who catches it in a cloth and places it
on the forehead of the patient.<note place='foot'>Nieuwenhuisen en Rosenberg, <q>Verslag
omtrent het Eiland Nias,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandel.
van het Batav. Genootsch. van
Kunsten en Wetenschappen</hi>, xxx. 116;
Rosenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Der Malayische Archipel</hi>, p.
174.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, souls may be extracted from their bodies or
detained on their wanderings not only by ghosts and
demons but also by men, especially by sorcerers. In
Fiji if a criminal refused to confess, the chief sent for
a scarf with which <q>to catch away the soul of the
rogue.</q> At the sight, or even at the mention of the
scarf the culprit generally made a clean breast. For if
he did not, the scarf would be waved over his head till
his soul was caught in it, when it would be carefully
folded up and nailed to the end of a chief's canoe; and
for want of his soul the criminal would pine and die.<note place='foot'>Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Fiji and the Fijians</hi>, i. 250.</note>
The sorcerers of Danger Island used to set snares for
souls. The snares were made of stout cinet, about
fifteen to thirty feet long, with loops on either side of
different sizes, to suit the different sizes of souls; for
fat souls there were large loops, for thin souls there
were small ones. When a man was sick against whom
the sorcerers had a grudge, they set up these soul-snares
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
near his house and watched for the flight of his
soul. If in the shape of a bird or an insect it was
caught in the snare the man would infallibly die.<note place='foot'>Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Songs of the South
Pacific</hi>, p. 171; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the Southern
Isles</hi>, p. 181 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Among the Sereres of Senegambia, when a man wishes
to revenge himself on his enemy he goes to the <foreign rend='italic'>Fitaure</foreign>
(chief and priest in one), and prevails on him by presents
to conjure the soul of his enemy into a large jar
of red earthenware, which is then deposited under a
consecrated tree. The man whose soul is shut up in
the jar soon dies.<note place='foot'>L. J. B. Bérenger-Féraud, <hi rend='italic'>Les
Peuplades de la Sénégambie</hi> (Paris, 1879),
p. 277.</note> Some of the Congo negroes think
that enchanters can get possession of human souls, and
enclosing them in tusks of ivory, sell them to the white
man, who makes them work for him in his country
under the sea. It is believed that very many of the
coast labourers are men thus obtained; so when these
people go to trade they often look anxiously about for
their dead relations. The man whose soul is thus sold
into slavery will die <q>in due course, if not at the time.</q><note place='foot'>W. H. Bentley, <hi rend='italic'>Life on the Congo</hi>
(London, 1887), p. 71.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Hawaii there were sorcerers who caught souls
of living people, shut them up in calabashes, and gave
them to people to eat. By squeezing a captured soul
in their hands they discovered the place where people
had been secretly buried.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus Volks-und
Menschenkunde</hi> (Berlin, 1888), i. 119.</note> Amongst the Canadian
Indians, when a wizard wished to kill a man, he sent
out his familiar spirits, who brought him the victim's
soul in the shape of a stone or the like. The wizard
struck the soul with a sword or an axe till it bled profusely,
and as it bled the man to whom it belonged
languished and died.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Relations des Jésuites</hi>, 1637, p.
50.</note> In Amboina if a doctor is convinced
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
that a patient's soul has been carried away by a
demon beyond recovery, he seeks to supply its place
with a soul abstracted from another man. For this
purpose he goes by night to a house and asks, <q>Who's
there?</q> If an inmate is incautious enough to answer,
the doctor takes up from before the door a clod of
earth, into which the soul of the person who replied is
believed to have passed. This clod the doctor lays
under the sick man's pillow, and performs certain ceremonies
by which the stolen soul is conveyed into the
patient's body. Then as he goes home the doctor
fires two shots to frighten the soul from returning to
its proper owner.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, p.
78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A Karen wizard will catch the
wandering soul of a sleeper and transfer it to the
body of a dead man. The latter, therefore, comes to
life as the former dies. But the friends of the sleeper
in turn engage a wizard to steal the soul of another
sleeper, who dies as the first sleeper comes to life. In
this way an indefinite succession of deaths and resurrections
is supposed to take place.<note place='foot'>E. B. Cross, <q>On the Karens,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the American Oriental
Society</hi>, iv. 307.</note>
</p>

<p>
The Indians of the Nass River, British Columbia,
think that a doctor may swallow his patient's soul by
mistake. A doctor who is believed to have done so
is made by the other doctors to stand over the patient,
while one of them thrusts his fingers down the doctor's
throat, another kneads him in the stomach with his
knuckles, and a third slaps him on the back. If the
soul is not in him after all, and if the same process has
been repeated upon all the doctors without success, it
is concluded that the soul must be in the head-doctor's
box. A party of doctors, therefore, waits upon him at
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
his house and requests him to produce his box. When
he has done so and arranged its contents on a new
mat, they take him and hold him up by the heels with
his head in a hole in the floor. In this position they
wash his head, and <q>any water remaining from the
ablution is taken and poured upon the sick man's
head.</q><note place='foot'>J. B. McCullagh in <hi rend='italic'>The Church
Missionary Gleaner</hi>, xiv. No. 164
(August 1887), p. 91. The same account
is copied from the <q>North Star</q>
(Sitka, Alaska, December 1888), in
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of American Folk-lore</hi>, ii.
74 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Mr. McCullagh's account
(which is closely followed in the text)
of the latter part of the custom is not
quite clear. It would seem that failing
to find the soul in the head-doctor's box
it occurs to them that he may have
swallowed it, as the other doctors were
at first supposed to have done. With
a view of testing this hypothesis they
hold him up by the heels to empty out
the soul; and as the water with which
his head is washed may possibly contain
the missing soul, it is poured on the
patient's head to restore the soul to him.
We have already seen that the recovered
soul is often conveyed into the sick
person's head.</note>
</p>

<p>
Other examples of the recall and recovery of souls
will be found referred to beneath.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De Topantunuasu of oorspronkelijke
volksstammen van Central
Selebes</hi> (overgedrukt uit de <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen
tot de Taal- Land- en Volkenkunde van
Nederlandsch-Indië</hi>, 5e volgr. i.), p. 17;
Neumann, <q>Het Pane en Bila-stroomgebied,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>,
ii. de Serie, dl. iii., Afdeeling: meer
uitgebreide artikelen, No. 2 (1886), p.
300 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Priklonski, <q>Die Jakuten,</q>
in Bastian's <hi rend='italic'>Allerlei aus Volks-und
Menschenkunde</hi>, ii. 218 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Bastian,
<hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen Asien</hi>, ii. 388,
iii. 236; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Völkerstämme am Brahmaputra</hi>,
p. 23; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>Hügelstämme
Assam's,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen d. Berlin.
Gesell. f. Anthropol. Ethnol. und
Urgeschichte</hi>, 1881, p. 156; Shway
Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman</hi>, i. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, ii. 101
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Sproat, <hi rend='italic'>Scenes and Studies of Savage
Life</hi>, p. 214; Doolittle, <hi rend='italic'>Social Life of the
Chinese</hi>, p. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (ed. Paxton Hood);
T. Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Fiji and the Fijians</hi>, i.
242; E. B. Cross, <q>On the Karens,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the American Oriental
Society</hi>, iv. 309 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; A. W. Howitt,
<q>On some Australian Beliefs,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Instit.</hi> xiii. 187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <q>On Australian Medicine Men,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xvi. 41; E. P.
Houghton, <q>On the Land Dayaks of
Upper Sarawak,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Memoirs of the
Anthropological Society of London</hi>, iii.
196 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; L. Dahle, <q>Sikidy and
Vintana,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Antananarivo Annual and
Madagascar Annual</hi>, xi. (1887) p.
320 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; C. Leemius, <hi rend='italic'>De Lapponibus
Finmarchiae eorumque lingua, vita et
religione pristina commentatio</hi> (Copenhagen,
1767), p. 416 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Some time
ago my friend Professor W. Robertson
Smith suggested to me that the practice
of hunting souls, which is denounced in
Ezekiel xiii. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> must have been
akin to those described in the text.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the spiritual dangers I have enumerated are
not the only ones which beset the savage. Often he
regards his shadow or reflection as his soul, or at all
<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>
events as a vital part of himself, and as such it is
necessarily a source of danger to him. For if it is
trampled upon, struck, or stabbed, he will feel the
injury as if it were done to his person; and if it is
detached from him entirely (as he believes that it may
be) he will die. In the island of Wetar there are
magicians who can make a man ill by stabbing his
shadow with a pike or hacking it with a sword.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, p.
440.</note>
After Sankara had destroyed the Buddhists in India,
it is said that he journeyed to Nepaul, where he had
some difference of opinion with the Grand Lama. To
prove his supernatural powers, he soared into the air.
But as he mounted up, the Grand Lama, perceiving
his shadow swaying and wavering on the ground,
struck his knife into it and down fell Sankara and
broke his neck.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, v. 455.</note> In the Babar Islands the demons get
power over a man's soul by holding fast his shadow, or
by striking and wounding it.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 340.</note> There are stones in
Melanesia on which, if a man's shadow falls, the demon
of the stone can draw out his soul.<note place='foot'>Codrington, <q>Religious Beliefs and
Practices in Melanesia,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journ.
Anthrop. Instit.</hi> x. 281.</note> In Amboina and
Uliase, two islands near the equator, and where,
therefore, there is little or no shadow cast at noon, it
is a rule not to go out of the house at mid-day, because
it is supposed that by doing so a man may lose the
shadow of his soul.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 61.</note> The Mangaians tell of a mighty
warrior, Tukaitawa, whose strength waxed and waned
with the length of his shadow. In the morning, when
his shadow fell longest, his strength was greatest; but
as the shadow shortened towards noon his strength
ebbed with it, till exactly at noon it reached its lowest
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
point; then, as the shadow stretched out in the afternoon,
his strength returned. A certain hero discovered
the secret of Tukaitawa's strength and slew
him at noon.<note place='foot'>Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Songs of the South
Pacific</hi>, p. 284 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> It is possible that even in lands outside
the tropics the fact of the diminished shadow at noon
may have contributed, even if it did not give rise, to
the superstitious dread with which that hour has been
viewed by various peoples, as by the Greeks, ancient
and modern, and by the Roumanians of Transylvania.<note place='foot'>Bernard Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Das Volksleben
der Neugriechen</hi>, pp. 94 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 119 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 972;
Rochholz, <hi rend='italic'>Deutscher Glaube und
Brauch</hi>, i. 62 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; E. Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>The
Land beyond the Forest</hi>, i. 331.</note>
In this fact, too, we may perhaps detect the reason
why noon was chosen by the Greeks as the hour for
sacrificing to the shadowless dead.<note place='foot'>Schol. on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Ran.</hi> 293.</note> The ancients
believed that in Arabia if a hyaena trod on a man's
shadow it deprived him of the power of speech and
motion; and that if a dog, standing on a roof in the
moonlight, cast a shadow on the ground and a hyaena
trod on it, the dog would fall down as if dragged with
a rope.<note place='foot'>[Aristotle] <hi rend='italic'>Mirab. Auscult.</hi> 145
(157); <hi rend='italic'>Geoponica</hi>, xv. 1. In the latter
passage, for κατάγει ἑαυτήν we must
read κ. αὐτόν, an emendation necessitated
by the context, and confirmed
by the passage of Damīrī quoted and
translated by Bochart, <hi rend='italic'>Hierozoicon</hi>,
i. c. 833, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cum ad lunam calcat umbram
canis, qui supra tectura est, canis
ad eam [scil. hyaenam] decidit, et ea
illum devorat</foreign>.</q> Cp. W. Robertson
Smith, <hi rend='italic'>The Religion of the Semites</hi>, i.
122.</note> Clearly in these cases the shadow, if not
equivalent to the soul, is at least regarded as a living
part of the man or the animal, so that injury done to
the shadow is felt by the person or animal as if it were
done to his body. Whoever entered the sanctuary of
Zeus on Mount Lycaeus in Arcadia was believed to
lose his shadow and to die within the year.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, viii. 38, 6; Polybius,
xvi. 12, 7; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Graec.</hi> 39.</note> Nowhere,
perhaps, does the equivalence of the shadow to the
life or soul come out more clearly than in some
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
customs practised to this day in South-Eastern Europe.
In modern Greece, when the foundation of a new
building is being laid, it is the custom to kill a cock, a
ram, or a lamb, and to let its blood flow on the foundation
stone, under which the animal is afterwards
buried. The object of the sacrifice is to give strength
and stability to the building. But sometimes, instead
of killing an animal, the builder entices a man to the
foundation stone, secretly measures his body, or a part
of it, or his shadow, and buries the measure under the
foundation stone; or he lays the foundation stone upon
the man's shadow. It is believed that the man will
die within the year.<note place='foot'>B. Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Das Volksleben der
Neugriechen</hi>, p. 196 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Bulgarians still observe a
similar custom. If they cannot get a human shadow
they measure the shadow of the first animal that comes
that way.<note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian
People</hi>, p. 127.</note> The Roumanians of Transylvania think
that he whose shadow is thus immured will die within
forty days; so persons passing by a building which is
in course of erection may hear a warning cry, <q>Beware
lest they take thy shadow!</q> Not long ago there were
still shadow-traders whose business it was to provide
architects with the shadows necessary for securing
their walls.<note place='foot'>W. Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Das Jahr und seine
Tage in Meinung und Brauch der Romänen
Siebenbürgens</hi>, p. 27; E. Gerard,
<hi rend='italic'>The Land beyond the Forest</hi>, ii. 17 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In these cases the measure of the shadow
is looked on as equivalent to the shadow itself, and to
bury it is to bury the life or soul of the man, who,
deprived of it, must die. Thus the custom is a substitute
for the old custom of immuring a living person
in the walls, or crushing him under the foundation
stone of a new building, in order to give strength and
durability to the structure.
</p>

<p>
As some peoples believe a man's soul to be in his
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
shadow, so other (or the same) peoples believe it to be
in his reflection in water or a mirror. Thus <q>the
Andamanese do not regard their shadows but their
reflections (in any mirror) as their souls.</q><note place='foot'>E. H. Mann, <hi rend='italic'>Aboriginal Inhabitants
of the Andaman Islands</hi>, p. 94.</note> Some of
the Fijians thought that man has two souls, a light
one and a dark one; the dark one goes to Hades, the
light one is his reflection in water or a mirror.<note place='foot'>Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Fiji</hi>, i. 241.</note> When
the Motumotu of New Guinea first saw their likenesses
in a looking-glass they thought that their reflections
were their souls.<note place='foot'>James Chalmers, <hi rend='italic'>Pioneering in
New Guinea</hi> (London, 1887), p. 170.</note> The reflection-soul, being external
to the man, is exposed to much the same dangers as
the shadow-soul. As the shadow may be stabbed, so
may the reflection. Hence an Aztec mode of keeping
sorcerers from the house was to leave a vessel of
water with a knife in it behind the door. When a
sorcerer entered he was so much alarmed at seeing
his reflection in the water transfixed by a knife that he
turned and fled.<note place='foot'>Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire générale des
choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne</hi> (Paris,
1880), p. 314. The Chinese hang
brass mirrors over the idols in their
houses, because it is thought that evil
spirits entering the house and seeing
themselves in the mirrors will be
scared away (<hi rend='italic'>China Review</hi>, ii. 164).</note> The Zulus will not look into a dark
pool because they think there is a beast in it which
will take away their reflections, so that they die.<note place='foot'>Callaway, <hi rend='italic'>Nursery Tales, Traditions,
and Histories of the Zulus</hi>, p.
342.</note> The
Basutos say that crocodiles have the power of thus
killing a man by dragging his reflection under water.<note place='foot'>Arbousset et Daumas, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage
d'exploration au Nord-est de la Colonie
du Cap de Bonne-Espérance</hi>, p. 12.</note>
In Saddle Island (Melanesia) there is a pool <q>into
which if any one looks he dies; the malignant spirit
takes hold upon his life by means of his reflection on
the water.</q><note place='foot'>Codrington, <q>Religious Beliefs
and Practices in Melanesia,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journ.
Anthrop. Instit.</hi> x. 313.</note>
</p>

<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>

<p>
We can now understand why it was a maxim both
in ancient India and ancient Greece not to look at
one's reflection in water, and why the Greeks regarded
it as an omen of death if a man dreamed of seeing
himself so reflected.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Fragmenta Philosoph. Graec.</hi> ed. Mullach, i. 510; Artemidorus, <hi rend='italic'>Onirocr.</hi>
ii. 7; <hi rend='italic'>Laws of Manu</hi>, iv. 38.</note> They feared that the water-spirits
would drag the person's reflection (soul) under
water, leaving him soulless to die. This was probably
the origin of the classical story of the beautiful Narcissus,
who pined and died in consequence of seeing his
reflection in the water. The explanation that he died
for love of his own fair image was probably devised
later, after the old meaning of the story was forgotten.
The same ancient belief lingers, in a faded form, in
the English superstition that whoever sees a water-fairy
must pine and die.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Alas, the moon should ever beam</q></l>
<l>To show what man should never see!&mdash;</l>
<l>I saw a maiden on a stream,</l>
<l>And fair was she!</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'><q rend='pre'>I staid to watch, a little space,</q></l>
<l>Her parted lips if she would sing;</l>
<l>The waters closed above her face</l>
<l>With many a ring.</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 6'><q rend='pre'>I know my life will fade away,</q></l>
<l>I know that I must vainly pine,</l>
<l>For I am made of mortal clay,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>But she's divine!</q></l>
</lg>

</quote>

<p>
Further, we can now explain the widespread custom
of covering up mirrors or turning them to the wall
after a death has taken place in the house. It is feared
that the soul, projected out of the person in the shape
of his reflection in the mirror, may be carried off by
the ghost of the departed, which is commonly supposed
to linger about the house till the burial. The custom
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
is thus exactly parallel to the Aru custom of not sleeping
in a house after a death for fear that the soul, projected
out of the body in a dream, may meet the ghost
and be carried off by it.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Oldenburg it is thought
that if a person sees his image in a mirror after a
death he will die himself. So all the mirrors in the
house are covered up with white cloth.<note place='foot'>Wattke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
§ 726.</note> In some
parts of Germany after a death not only the mirrors
but everything that shines or glitters (windows, clocks,
etc.) is covered up,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi></note> doubtless because they might
reflect a person's image. The same custom of covering
up mirrors or turning them to the wall after a
death prevails in England, Scotland, and Madagascar.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, iii. 281; Dyer,
<hi rend='italic'>English Folk-lore</hi>, p. 109; J. Napier,
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore, or Superstitious Beliefs in the
West of Scotland</hi>, p. 60; Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>History
of Madagascar</hi>, i. 238; <hi rend='italic'>Revue d'Ethnographie</hi>,
v. 215.</note>
The Suni Mohammedans of Bombay cover with a
cloth the mirror in the room of a dying man and do
not remove it until the corpse is carried out for burial.
They also cover the looking-glasses in their bedrooms
before retiring to rest at night.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Punjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. 906.</note> The reason why sick
people should not see themselves in a mirror, and
why the mirror in a sick-room is therefore covered up,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vi. 145 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii., No. 378.</note>
is also plain; in time of sickness, when the soul
might take flight so easily, it is particularly dangerous
to project the soul out of the body by means of the
reflection in a mirror. The rule is therefore precisely
parallel to the rule observed by some peoples of not
allowing sick people to sleep;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xv. 82 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> for in sleep the soul
is projected out of the body, and there is always a
risk that it may not return. <q>In the opinion of the
Raskolniks a mirror is an accursed thing, invented by
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
the devil,</q><note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian
People</hi>, p. 117. The objection, however,
may be merely Puritanical. Professor
W. Robertson Smith informs me
that the peculiarities of the Raskolniks
are largely due to exaggerated Puritanism.</note> perhaps on account of the mirror's
supposed power of drawing out the soul in the reflection
and so facilitating its capture.
</p>

<p>
As with shadows and reflections, so with portraits;
they are often believed to contain the soul of the person
portrayed. People who hold this belief are naturally
loth to have their likenesses taken; for if the portrait
is the soul, or at least a vital part of the person
portrayed, whoever possesses the portrait will be able
to exercise a fatal influence over the original of it.
Thus the Canelos Indians of South America think that
their soul is carried away in their picture. Two of
them having been photographed were so alarmed that
they came back next day on purpose to ask if it were
really true that their souls had been taken away.<note place='foot'>A. Simson, <q>Notes on the Jivaros
and Canelos Indians,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journ.
Anthrop. Inst.</hi> ix. 392.</note>
When Mr. Joseph Thomson tried to photograph some
of the Wa-teita in Eastern Africa, they imagined that
he was a magician trying to get possession of their souls,
and that if he got their likenesses they themselves
would be entirely at his mercy.<note place='foot'>J. Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>Through Masai Land</hi>,
p. 86.</note> An Indian, whose
portrait the Prince of Wied wished to get, refused to
let himself be drawn, because he believed it would
cause his death.<note place='foot'>Maximilian Prinz zu Wied, <hi rend='italic'>Reise
in das Innere Nord-Amerika</hi>, i. 417.</note> The Mandans also thought that they
would soon die if their portrait was in the hands of
another; they wished at least to have the artist's picture
as a kind of antidote or guarantee.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> ii. 166.</note> The same belief
still lingers in various parts of Europe. Some old
women in the Greek island of Carpathus were very
angry a few years ago at having their likenesses drawn,
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
thinking that in consequence they would pine and die.<note place='foot'><q>A far-off Greek Island,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Blackwood's
Magazine</hi>, February 1886, p.
235.</note>
Some people in Russia object to having their silhouettes
taken, fearing that if this is done they will die before
the year is out.<note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian
People</hi>, p. 117.</note> There are persons in the West of
Scotland <q>who refuse to have their likeness taken lest it
prove unlucky; and give as instances the cases of
several of their friends who never had a day's health
after being photographed.</q><note place='foot'>James Napier, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore: or,
Superstitious Beliefs in the West of
Scotland</hi>, p. 142. For more examples of
the same sort, see R. Andree, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische
Parallelen und Vergleiche</hi>,
Neue Folge (Leipzig, 1889), p. 18
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Royal and priestly taboos (continued).'/>
<head>§ 3.&mdash;Royal and priestly taboos (continued).</head>

<p>
So much for the primitive conceptions of the soul
and the dangers to which it is exposed. These conceptions
are not limited to one people or country; with
variations of detail they are found all over the world,
and survive, as we have seen, in modern Europe.
Beliefs so deep-seated and so widespread must
necessarily have contributed to shape the mould in
which the early kingship was cast. For if every
individual was at such pains to save his own soul from
the perils which threatened it from so many sides, how
much more carefully must <emph>he</emph> have been guarded upon
whose life hung the welfare and even the existence of
the whole people, and whom therefore it was the common
interest of all to preserve? Therefore we should expect
to find the king's life protected by a system of precautions
or safeguards still more numerous and minute
than those which in primitive society every man adopts
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
for the safety of his own soul. Now in point of fact
the life of the early kings is regulated, as we have seen
and shall see more fully presently, by a very exact
code of rules. May we not then conjecture that these
rules are the very safeguards which on <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>à priori</foreign> grounds
we expect to find adopted for the protection of the
king's life? An examination of the rules themselves
confirms this conjecture. For from this it appears that
some of the rules observed by the kings are identical
with those observed by private persons out of regard
for the safety of their souls; and even of those which
seem peculiar to the king, many, if not all, are most
readily explained on the hypothesis that they are
nothing but safeguards or lifeguards of the king. I
will now enumerate some of these royal rules or
taboos, offering on each of them such comments and
explanations as may serve to set the original intention
of the rule in its proper light.
</p>

<p>
As the object of the royal taboos is to isolate the
king from all sources of danger, their general effect
is to compel him to live in a state of seclusion,
more or less complete, according to the number and
stringency of the taboos he observes. Now of all
sources of danger none are more dreaded by the
savage than magic and witchcraft, and he suspects
all strangers of practising these black arts. To guard
against the baneful influence exerted voluntarily or
involuntarily by strangers is therefore an elementary
dictate of savage prudence. Hence before strangers
are allowed to enter a district, or at least before they
are permitted to mingle freely with the people of the
district, certain ceremonies are often performed by the
natives of the country for the purpose of disarming the
strangers of their magical powers, of counteracting the
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
baneful influence which is believed to emanate from
them, or of disinfecting, so to speak, the tainted
atmosphere by which they are supposed to be
surrounded. Thus in the island of Nanumea (South
Pacific) strangers from ships or from other islands
were not allowed to communicate with the people until
they all, or a few as representatives of the rest, had
been taken to each of the four temples in the island,
and prayers offered that the god would avert any
disease or treachery which these strangers might have
brought with them. Meat offerings were also laid
upon the altars, accompanied by songs and dances in
honour of the god. While these ceremonies were
going on, all the people except the priests and their
attendants kept out of sight.<note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 291 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On returning from an
attempted ascent of the great African mountain
Kilimanjaro, which is believed by the neighbouring
tribes to be tenanted by dangerous demons, Mr.
New and his party, as soon as they reached the border
of the inhabited country, were disenchanted by the
inhabitants, being sprinkled with <q>a professionally
prepared liquor, supposed to possess the potency of
neutralising evil influences, and removing the spell
of wicked spirits.</q><note place='foot'>Charles New, <hi rend='italic'>Life, Wanderings,
and Labours in Eastern Africa</hi>, p. 432.
Cp. <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> pp. 400, 402. For the demons
on Mt. Kilimanjaro, see also Krapf,
<hi rend='italic'>Travels, Researches etc. in Eastern
Africa</hi>, p. 192.</note> In the interior of Yoruba (West
Africa) the sentinels at the gates of towns often oblige
European travellers to wait till nightfall before they
admit them, the fear being that if the strangers were
admitted by day the devils would enter behind them.<note place='foot'>Pierre Bouche, <hi rend='italic'>La Côte des Esclaves
et le Dahomey</hi>, p. 133.</note>
Amongst the Ot Danoms of Borneo it is the custom
that strangers entering the territory should pay to
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
the natives a certain sum, which is spent in the sacrifice
of animals (buffaloes or pigs) to the spirits of
the land and water, in order to reconcile them to the
presence of the strangers, and to induce them not to
withdraw their favour from the people of the land,
but to bless the rice-harvest, etc.<note place='foot'>C. A. L. M. Schwaner, <hi rend='italic'>Borneo</hi>, ii.
77.</note> The men of a
certain district in Borneo, fearing to look upon a
European traveller lest he should make them ill,
warned their wives and children not to go near him.
These who could not restrain their curiosity killed
fowls to appease the evil spirits and smeared themselves
with the blood.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> ii. 167.</note> In Laos before a stranger
can be accorded hospitality the master of the house
must offer sacrifice to the ancestral spirits; otherwise
the spirits would be offended and would send disease
on the inmates.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notes sur le Laos</hi>,
p. 196.</note> In the Mentawej Islands when a
stranger enters a house where there are children, the
father or other member of the family takes the ornament
which the children wear in their hair and hands
it to the stranger, who holds it in his hands for a
while and then gives it back to him. This is thought
to protect the children from the evil effect which the
sight of a stranger might have upon them.<note place='foot'>Rosenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Der Malayische Archipel</hi>,
p. 198.</note> At
Shepherd's Isle Captain Moresby had to be disenchanted
before he was allowed to land his boat's crew. When
he leaped ashore a devil-man seized his right hand
and waved a bunch of palm leaves over the captain's
head. Then <q>he placed the leaves in my left hand,
putting a small green twig into his mouth, still holding
me fast, and then, as if with great effort, drew
the twig from his mouth&mdash;this was extracting the evil
<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>
spirit&mdash;after which he blew violently, as if to speed
it away. I now held a twig between my teeth, and
he went through the same process.</q> Then the two
raced round a couple of sticks fixed in the ground
and bent to an angle at the top, which had leaves tied
to it. After some more ceremonies the devil-man
concluded by leaping to the level of Captain Moresby's
shoulders (his hands resting on the captain's shoulders)
several times, <q>as if to show that he had conquered
the devil, and was now trampling him into the earth.</q><note place='foot'>Capt. John Moresby, <hi rend='italic'>Discoveries
and Surveys in New Guinea</hi>, p. 102 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
North American Indians <q>have an idea that strangers,
particularly white strangers, are ofttimes accompanied
by evil spirits. Of these they have great dread, as
creating and delighting in mischief. One of the duties
of the medicine chief is to exorcise these spirits.
I have sometimes ridden into or through a camp
where I was unknown or unexpected, to be confronted
by a tall, half-naked savage, standing in the middle
of the circle of lodges, and yelling in a sing-song,
nasal tone, a string of unintelligible words.</q><note place='foot'>R. I. Dodge, <hi rend='italic'>Our Wild Indians</hi>
(Hartford, Conn.; 1886), p. 119.</note> When
Crevaux was travelling in South America he entered
a village of the Apalai Indians. A few moments after
his arrival some of the Indians brought him a number
of large black ants, of a species whose bite is painful,
fastened on palm leaves. Then all the people
of the village, without distinction of age or sex,
presented themselves to him, and he had to sting
them all with the ants on their faces, thighs, etc.
Sometimes when he applied the ants too tenderly they
called out <q>More! more!</q> and were not satisfied till
their skin was thickly studded with tiny swellings like
what might have been produced by whipping them
<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>
with nettles.<note place='foot'>J. Crevaux, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages dans
l'Amérique du Sud</hi>, p. 300.</note> The object of this ceremony is made
plain by the custom observed in Amboina and Uliase
of sprinkling sick people with pungent spices, such as
ginger and cloves, chewed fine, in order by the prickling
sensation to drive away the demon of disease which
may be clinging to their persons.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, p. 78.</note> With a similar
intention some of the natives of Borneo and Celebes
sprinkle rice upon the head or body of a person
supposed to be infested by dangerous spirits; a fowl
is then brought, which, by picking up the rice from the
person's head or body, removes along with it the spirit
or ghost which is clinging like a burr to his skin.
This is done, for example, to persons who have
attended a funeral, and who may therefore be supposed
to be infested by the ghost of the deceased.<note place='foot'>Perelaer, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnographische Beschrijving
der Dajaks</hi>, pp. 44, 54, 252;
Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de Ethnologie
van Zuid-Celebes</hi>, p. 49.</note> Similarly
Basutos, who have carried a corpse to the grave, have
their hands scratched with a knife from the tip of the
thumb to the tip of the forefinger, and magic stuff
is rubbed into the wound,<note place='foot'>H. Grützner, <q>Ueber die Gebräuche
der Basutho,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandl. d. Berlin.
Gesell. f. Anthropologie</hi>, etc. 1877, p.
84 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> for the purpose, no doubt,
of removing the ghost which may be adhering to their
skin. The people of Nias carefully scrub and scour
the weapons and clothes which they buy, in order
to efface all connection between the things and the
persons from whom they bought them.<note place='foot'>Nieuwenhuisen en Rosenberg,
<q>Verslag omtrent het eiland Nias,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Verhandel. v. h. Batav. Genootsch. v.
Kunsten en Wetenschappen</hi>, xxx. 26.</note> It is probable
that the same dread of strangers, rather than any
desire to do them honour, is the motive of certain
ceremonies which are sometimes observed at their
reception, but of which the intention is not directly
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
stated. In Afghanistan and in some parts of Persia
the traveller, before he enters a village, is frequently
received with a sacrifice of animal life or food, or of
fire and incense. The recent Afghan Boundary Mission,
in passing by villages in Afghanistan, was often met
with fire and incense.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Anthropological
Society of Bombay</hi>, i. 35.</note> Sometimes a tray of lighted
embers is thrown under the hoofs of the traveller's horse,
with the words, <q>You are welcome.</q><note place='foot'>E. O'Donovan, <hi rend='italic'>The Merv Oasis</hi>
(London, 1882), ii. 58.</note> On entering a
village in Central Africa Emin Pasha was received
with the sacrifice of two goats; their blood was
sprinkled on the path and the chief stepped over the
blood to greet Emin.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Emin Pasha in Central Africa,
being a Collection of his Letters and
Journals</hi> (London, 1888), p. 107.</note> Amongst the Eskimos of
Cumberland Inlet, when a stranger arrives at an
encampment, the sorcerer goes out to meet him. The
stranger folds his arms and inclines his head to one
side, so as to expose his cheek, upon which the
sorcerer deals a terrible blow, sometimes felling him to
the ground. Next the sorcerer in his turn presents
his cheek and receives a buffet from the stranger.
Then they kiss each other, the ceremony is over, and
the stranger is hospitably received by all.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the Second Arctic
Expedition made by Charles F. Hall.</hi>
Edited by Prof. J. G. Nourse, U.S.N.
(Washington, 1879), p. 269 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> Sometimes
the dread of strangers and their magic is too great to
allow of their reception on any terms. Thus when
Speke arrived at a certain village the natives shut
their doors against him, <q>because they had never
before seen a white man nor the tin boxes that the
men were carrying: <q>Who knows,</q> they said, <q>but that
these very boxes are the plundering Watuta transformed
and come to kill us? You cannot be admitted.</q> No
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
persuasion could avail with them, and the party had to
proceed to the next village.</q><note place='foot'>J. A. Grant, <hi rend='italic'>A Walk across Africa</hi>,
p. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The fear thus entertained of alien visitors is often
mutual. Entering a strange land, the savage feels
that he is treading enchanted ground, and he takes
steps to guard against the demons that haunt it and
the magical arts of its inhabitants. Thus on going to
a strange land the Maoris performed certain ceremonies
to make it <foreign rend='italic'>noa</foreign> (common), lest it might have been
previously <foreign rend='italic'>tapu</foreign> (sacred).<note place='foot'>E. Shortland, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions and
Superstitions of the New Zealanders</hi>, p.
103.</note> When Baron Miklucho-Maclay
was approaching a village on the Maclay Coast
of New Guinea, one of the natives who accompanied
him broke a branch from a tree and going aside
whispered to it for a while; then going up to each
member of the party, one after another, he spat something
upon his back and gave him some blows with
the branch. Lastly, he went into the forest and buried
the branch under withered leaves in the thickest part
of the jungle. This ceremony was believed to protect
the party against all treachery and danger in the
village they were approaching.<note place='foot'>N. von Miklucho-Maclay, <q>Ethnologische
Bemerkungen über die
Papuas der Maclay-Küste in Neu-Guinea,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Natuurkundig Tijdschrift
voor Nederlandsch Indie</hi>, xxxvi. 317 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The idea probably
was that the malignant influences were drawn off from
the persons into the branch and buried with it in the
depths of the forest. In Australia, when a strange
tribe has been invited into a district and is approaching
the encampment of the tribe which owns the land,
<q>the strangers carry lighted bark or burning sticks in
their hands, for the purpose, they say, of clearing and
purifying the air.</q><note place='foot'>Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of
Victoria</hi>, i. 134.</note> So when two Greek armies were
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
advancing to the onset, sacred men used to march in
front of each, bearing lighted torches, which they flung
into the space between the hosts and then retired
unmolested.<note place='foot'>Scholiast on Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Phoeniss.</hi>
1377. These men were sacred to the
war-god (Ares), and were always spared
in battle.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, it is thought that a man who has been on a
journey may have contracted some magic evil from the
strangers with whom he has been brought into contact.
Hence on returning home, before he is readmitted
to the society of his tribe and friends, he has to
undergo certain purificatory ceremonies. Thus the
Bechuanas <q>cleanse or purify themselves after journeys
by shaving their heads, etc., lest they should have
contracted from strangers some evil by witchcraft or
sorcery.</q><note place='foot'>John Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Travels in South
Africa, being a Narrative of a Second
Journey in the Interior of that Country</hi>,
ii. 205.</note> In some parts of Western Africa when a
man returns home after a long absence, before he is
allowed to visit his wife, he must wash his person with
a particular fluid, and receive from the sorcerer a certain
mark on his forehead, in order to counteract any
magic spell which a stranger woman may have cast
on him in his absence, and which might be communicated
through him to the women of his village.<note place='foot'>Ladislaus Magyar, <hi rend='italic'>Reisen in Süd-Afrika</hi>,
p. 203.</note> Two
Hindoo ambassadors, who had been sent to England
by a native prince and had returned to India, were
considered to have so polluted themselves by contact
with strangers that nothing but being born again could
restore them to purity. <q>For the purpose of regeneration
it is directed to make an image of pure gold of
the female power of nature, in the shape either of a
woman or of a cow. In this statue the person to be
regenerated is enclosed, and dragged through the
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
usual channel. As a statue of pure gold and of proper
dimensions would be too expensive, it is sufficient to
make an image of the sacred <foreign rend='italic'>Yoni</foreign>, through which the
person to be regenerated is to pass.</q> Such an image
of pure gold was made at the prince's command, and
his ambassadors were born again by being dragged
through it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Asiatick Researches</hi>, vi. 535 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> ed.
4to (p. 537 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> ed. 8vo).</note> When Damaras return home after a long
absence, they are given a small portion of the fat of
particular animals which is supposed to possess certain
virtues.<note place='foot'>C. J. Andersson, <hi rend='italic'>Lake Ngami</hi>, p.
223.</note> In some of the Moluccas, when a brother or
young blood-relation returns from a long journey, a
young girl awaits him at the door with a <foreign rend='italic'>caladi</foreign> leaf in
her hand and water in the leaf. She throws the water
over his face and bids him welcome.<note place='foot'>François Valentyn, <hi rend='italic'>Oud en nieuw
Oost-Indiën</hi>, iii. 16.</note> The natives of
Savage Island (South Pacific) invariably killed, not
only all strangers in distress who were drifted to their
shores, but also any of their own people who had gone
away in a ship and returned home. This was done
out of dread of disease. Long after they began to
venture out to ships they would not immediately use
the things they obtained from them, but hung them up
in quarantine for weeks in the bush.<note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 305 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
When precautions like these are taken on behalf
of the people in general against the malignant influence
supposed to be exercised by strangers, we shall not be
surprised to find that special measures are adopted to
protect the king from the same insidious danger. In
the middle ages the envoys who visited a Tartar Khan
were obliged to pass between two fires before they
were admitted to his presence, and the gifts they
brought were also carried between the fires. The
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
reason assigned for the custom was that the fire
purged away any magic influence which the strangers
might mean to exercise over the Khan.<note place='foot'>De Plano Carpini, <hi rend='italic'>Historia Mongolorum
quos nos Tartaros appellamus</hi>,
ed. D'Avezac (Paris, 1838), cap. iii. § iii.
p. 627, cap. ult. § i. x. p. 744, and
Appendix, p. 775; <q>Travels of William
de Rubriquis into Tartary and China,</q>
in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, vii.
82 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When
subject chiefs come with their retinues to visit
Kalamba (the most powerful chief of the Bashilange
in the Congo Basin) for the first time or after being
rebellious, they have to bathe, men and women
together, in two brooks on two successive days, passing
the nights in the open air in the market-place.
After the second bath they proceed, entirely naked, to
the house of Kalamba, who makes a long white mark
on the breast and forehead of each of them. Then
they return to the market-place and dress, after which
they undergo the pepper ordeal. Pepper is dropped
into the eyes of each of them, and while this is being
done the sufferer has to make a confession of all his
sins, to answer all questions that may be put to him,
and to take certain vows. This ends the ceremony,
and the strangers are now free to take up their
quarters in the town for as long as they choose to
remain.<note place='foot'>Paul Pogge, <q>Bericht über die
Station Mukenge,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen
der Afrikanischen Gesellschaft in
Deutschland</hi>, iv. (1883-1885) 182 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Kilema, in Eastern Africa, when a
stranger arrives, a medicine is made out of a certain
plant or a tree fetched from a distance, mixed with the
blood of a sheep or goat. With this mixture the
stranger is besmeared or besprinkled before he is
admitted to the presence of the king.<note place='foot'>J. L. Krapf, <hi rend='italic'>Travels, Researches,
and Missionary Labours during an
Eighteen Years' Residence in Eastern
Africa</hi>, p. 252 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The King of
Monomotapa (South-East Africa) might not wear any
foreign stuffs for fear of their being poisoned.<note place='foot'>Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>,
p. 391.</note> The
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
King of Kakongo (West Africa) might not possess or
even touch European goods, except metals, arms, and
articles made of wood and ivory. Persons wearing
foreign stuffs were very careful to keep at a distance
from his person, lest they should touch him.<note place='foot'>Proyart, <q>History of Loango,
Kakongo,</q> etc., in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages
and Travels</hi>, xvi. 583; Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 340; J. Ogilby, <hi rend='italic'>Africa</hi> (London,
1670), p. 521. Cp. Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die
deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</hi>,
i. 288.</note> The
King of Loango might not look upon the house of a
white man.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In the opinion of savages the acts of eating and
drinking are attended with special danger; for at these
times the soul may escape from the mouth, or be extracted
by the magic arts of an enemy present. Precautions
are therefore taken to guard against these
dangers. Thus of the Battas of Sumatra it is said
that <q>since the soul can leave the body, they always
take care to prevent their soul from straying on occasions
when they have most need of it. But it is only
possible to prevent the soul from straying when one
is in the house. At feasts one may find the whole
house shut up, in order that the soul (<foreign rend='italic'>tondi</foreign>) may stay
and enjoy the good things set before it.</q><note place='foot'>J. B. Neumann, <q>Het Pane-en Bila-Stroomgebied
op het eiland Sumatra,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift van het Nederlandsch
Aardrijkskundig Genootschap</hi>, ii. de
Serie, dl. iii., Afdeeling: meer uitgebreide
artikelen, No. 2, p. 300.</note> In Fiji
persons who suspected others of plotting against them
avoided eating in their presence, or were careful to
leave no fragment of food behind.<note place='foot'>Th. Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Fiji and the Fijians</hi>,
i. 249.</note> The Zafimanelo
in Madagascar lock their doors when they eat, and
hardly any one ever sees them eating.<note place='foot'>J. Richardson, <q>Tanala Customs,
Superstitions and Beliefs,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>The Antananarivo
Annual and Madagascar
Magazine</hi>, No. ii. p. 219.</note> The Warua
will not allow any one to see them eating and drinking,
being doubly particular that no person of the opposite
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
sex shall see them doing so. <q>I had to pay a man to
let me see him drink; I could not make a man let a
woman see him drink.</q> When offered a drink of <foreign rend='italic'>pombe</foreign>
they often ask that a cloth may be held up to hide them
whilst drinking. Further, each man and woman must
cook for themselves; each person must have his own
fire.<note place='foot'>Lieut. Cameron, <hi rend='italic'>Across Africa</hi>, ii.
71 (ed. 1877); <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop.
Inst.</hi> vi. 173.</note> If these are the ordinary precautions taken by
common people, the precautions taken by kings are
extraordinary. The King of Loango may not be seen
eating or drinking by man or beast under pain of death.
A favourite dog having broken into the room where
the king was dining, the king ordered it to be killed
on the spot. Once the king's own son, a boy of
twelve years old, inadvertently saw the king drink.
Immediately the king ordered him to be finely apparelled
and feasted, after which he commanded him to be cut
in quarters, and carried about the city with a proclamation
that he had seen the king drink. <q>When the
king has a mind to drink, he has a cup of wine brought;
he that brings it has a bell in his hand, and as soon as
he has delivered the cup to the king he turns his face
from him and rings the bell, on which all present fall
down with their faces to the ground, and continue so
till the king has drank.... His eating is much in the
same style, for which he has a house on purpose, where
his victuals are set upon a bensa or table: which he
goes to and shuts the door; when he has done, he
knocks and comes out. So that none ever see the
king eat or drink. For it is believed that if any one
should, the king shall immediately die.</q><note place='foot'><q>Adventures of Andrew Battel,</q>
in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>,
xvi. 330; Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de
l'Afrique</hi>, p. 330; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche
Expedition an der Loango-Küste</hi>, i.
262 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; R. F. Burton, <hi rend='italic'>Abeokuta and
the Cameroons Mountains</hi>, i. 147.</note> The rules
<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>
observed by the neighbouring King of Kakongo were
similar; it was thought that the king would die if any
of his subjects were to see him drink.<note place='foot'>Proyart's <q>History of Loango,
Kakongo,</q> etc., in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages
and Travels</hi>, xvi. 584.</note> It is a capital
offence to see the King of Dahomey at his meals.
When he drinks in public, as he does on extraordinary
occasions, he hides himself behind a curtain, or handkerchiefs
are held up round his head, and all the people
throw themselves with their faces to the earth.<note place='foot'>J. L. Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>West Afrika</hi>, p. 148
(German trans.); John Duncan, <hi rend='italic'>Travels
in Western Africa</hi>, i. 222. Cp. W.
W. Reade, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Africa</hi>, p. 543.</note> Any
one who saw the Muato Jamwo (a great potentate in
the Congo Basin) eating or drinking would certainly be
put to death.<note place='foot'>Paul Pogge, <hi rend='italic'>Im Reiche des Muato
Jamwo</hi> (Berlin, 1880), p. 231.</note> When the King of Tonga ate all the
people turned their backs to him.<note place='foot'>Capt. James Cook, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages</hi>, v. 374
(ed. 1809).</note> In the palace of
the Persian kings there were two dining-rooms opposite
each other; in one of them the king dined, in the
other his guests. He could see them through a curtain
on the door, but they could not see him. Generally
the king took his meals alone; but sometimes his wife
or some of his sons dined with him.<note place='foot'>Heraclides Cumanus in Athenaeus,
iv. 145 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>-<hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
In these cases, however, the intention may perhaps
be to hinder evil influences from entering the body
rather than to prevent the escape of the soul. To
the former rather than to the latter motive is to
be ascribed the custom observed by some African
sultans of veiling their faces. The Sultan of Darfur
wraps up his face with a piece of white muslin, which
goes round his head several times, covering his mouth
and nose first, and then his forehead, so that only his
eyes are visible. The same custom of veiling the face
as a mark of sovereignty is said to be observed in other
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
parts of Central Africa.<note place='foot'>Mohammed Ibn-Omar el Tounsy,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage au Darfour</hi> (Paris, 1845), p.
203; <hi rend='italic'>Travels of an Arab Merchant</hi>
[Mohammed Ibn-Omar el Tounsy] <hi rend='italic'>in
Soudan</hi>, abridged from the French (of
Perron) by Bayle St. John, p. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Sultan of Wadai always
speaks from behind a curtain; no one sees his face
except his intimates and a few favoured persons.<note place='foot'>Mohammed Ibn-Omar el Tounsy,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage au Ouadây</hi> (Paris, 1851), p. 375.</note>
Amongst the Touaregs of the Sahara all the men (but
not the women) keep the lower part of their face, especially
the mouth, veiled constantly; the veil is never
put off, not even in eating or sleeping.<note place='foot'>H. Duveyrier, <hi rend='italic'>Exploration du Sahara</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Les Touareg du Nord</hi>, p. 391 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Reclus, <hi rend='italic'>Nouvelle Géographie Universelle</hi>,
xi. 838 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; James Richardson,
<hi rend='italic'>Travels in the Great Desert of Sahara</hi>,
ii. 208. Amongst the Arabs men sometimes
veiled their faces. Wellhausen,
<hi rend='italic'>Reste Arabischen Heidentumes</hi>, p. 146.</note> In Samoa
a man whose family god was the turtle might not
eat a turtle, and if he helped a neighbour to cut
up and cook one he had to wear a bandage tied
over his mouth, lest an embryo turtle should slip
down his throat, grow up, and be his death.<note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 67 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
West Timor a speaker holds his right hand before
his mouth in speaking lest a demon should enter his
body, and lest the person with whom he converses
should harm the speaker's soul by magic.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <q>Die Landschaft Dawan
oder West-Timor,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Geographische
Blatter</hi>, x. 230.</note> In
New South Wales for some time after his initiation
into the tribal mysteries, a young blackfellow (whose
soul at this time is in a critical state) must always cover
his mouth with a rug when a woman is present.<note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>On some Australian
Ceremonies of Initiation,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xiii. 456.</note>
Popular expressions in the language of civilised peoples,
such as to have one's heart in one's mouth, show
how natural is the idea that the life or soul may escape
by the mouth or nostrils.<note place='foot'>Compare μόνον οὐκ ἐπὶ τοῖς χείλεσι
τὰς ψυχὰς ἔχοντας Dio Chrysostomus,
<hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> xxxii. i. 417, ed. Dindorf;
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mihi anima in naso esse, stabam tanquam
mortuus</foreign>, Petronius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> 62; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in
primis labris animam habere</foreign>, Seneca,
<hi rend='italic'>Natur Quaest</hi>. iii. praef. 16.</note>
</p>

<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>

<p>
By an extension of the like precaution kings are
sometimes forbidden ever to leave their palaces; or, if
they are allowed to do so, their subjects are forbidden
to see them abroad. We have seen that the priestly
king at Shark Point, West Africa, may never quit his
house or even his chair, in which he is obliged to sleep
sitting.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>.</note> After his coronation the King of Loango is
confined to his palace, which he may not leave.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Loango-Küste</hi>, i. 263.
However, a case is recorded in which
he marched out to war (<hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> i. 268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>)</note> The
King of Ibo (West Africa) <q>does not step out of his
house into the town unless a human sacrifice is made
to propitiate the gods: on this account he never goes
out beyond the precincts of his premises.</q><note place='foot'>S. Crowther and J. C. Taylor,
<hi rend='italic'>The Gospel on the Banks of the Niger</hi>,
p. 433. On p. 379 mention is made
of the king's <q>annual appearance to the
public,</q> but this may have taken place
within <q>the precincts of his premises.</q></note> The kings
of Aethiopia were worshipped as gods, but were mostly
kept shut up in their palaces.<note place='foot'>Strabo, xvii. 2, 2, σέβονται δ᾽ ὠς
θεούς τοὺς βασιλέας, κατακλείστους ὄντας
καὶ οἰκουροὺς τὸ πλέον.</note> The kings of Sabaea
(Sheba), the spice country of Arabia, were not allowed
to go out of their palaces; if they did so, the mob
stoned them to death.<note place='foot'>Strabo, xvi. 4, 19; Diodorus
Siculus, iii. 47.</note> But at the top of the palace
there was a window with a chain attached to it. If
any man deemed he had suffered wrong, he pulled the
chain, and the king perceived him and called him in
and gave judgment.<note place='foot'>Heraclides Cumanus in Athenaeus,
517 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi></note> So to this day the kings of
Corea, whose persons are sacred and receive <q>honours
almost divine,</q> are shut up in their palace from
the age of twelve or fifteen; and if a suitor wishes to
obtain justice of the king he sometimes lights a great
bonfire on a mountain facing the palace; the king
sees the fire and informs himself of the case.<note place='foot'>Ch. Dallet, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de l'Église de
Corée</hi> (Paris, 1874), i. xxiv-xxvi.
The king sometimes, though rarely,
leaves his palace. When he does so,
notice is given beforehand to the people.
All doors must be shut and each householder
must kneel before his threshold
with a broom and a dust-pan in his
hand. All windows, especially the
upper ones, must be sealed with slips of
paper, lest some one should look down
upon the king. W. E. Griffis, <hi rend='italic'>Corea,
the Hermit Nation</hi>, p. 222.</note> The
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
King of Tonquin was permitted to appear abroad twice
or thrice a year for the performance of certain religious
ceremonies; but the people were not allowed to look
at him. The day before he came forth notice was
given to all the inhabitants of the city and country to
keep from the way the king was to go; the women
were obliged to remain in their houses and durst not
show themselves under pain of death, a penalty which
was carried out on the spot if any one disobeyed the
order, even through ignorance. Thus the king was
invisible to all but his troops and the officers of his
suite.<note place='foot'>Richard, <q>History of Tonquin,</q>
in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, ix.
746.</note> In Mandalay a stout lattice-paling, six feet
high and carefully kept in repair, lined every street in
the walled city and all those in the suburbs through
which the king was likely at any time to pass. Behind
this paling, which stood two feet or so from the houses,
all the people had to stay when the king or any of the
queens went out. Any one who was caught outside
it by the beadles after the procession had started was
severely handled, and might think himself lucky if he
got off with a beating. No one was supposed to look
through the holes in the lattice-work, which were
besides partly stopped up with flowering shrubs.<note place='foot'>Shway Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman</hi>, i. 308 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Again, magic mischief may be wrought upon a
man through the remains of the food he has partaken
of, or the dishes out of which he has eaten. Thus
the Narrinyeri in South Australia think that if a man
eats of the sacred animal (totem) of his tribe, and an
enemy gets hold of a portion of the flesh, the latter
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
can make it grow in the inside of the eater, and
so cause his death. Therefore when a man eats
of his totem he is careful to eat it all or else to
conceal or destroy the remains.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>,
p. 63; Taplin, <q>Notes on the mixed
races of Australia,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop.
Inst.</hi> iv. 53.</note> In Tana, one
of the New Hebrides, people bury or throw into
the sea the leavings of their food, lest these should
fall into the hands of the disease-makers. For if
a disease-maker finds the remnants of a meal, say
the skin of a banana, he picks it up and burns it
slowly in the fire. As it burns the person who ate
the banana falls ill and sends to the disease-maker,
offering him presents if he will stop burning the
banana skin.<note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 320 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Hence no one may touch the food
which the King of Loango leaves upon his plate; it
is buried in a hole in the ground. And no one may
drink out of the king's vessel.<note place='foot'>Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>,
p. 330.</note> Similarly no man
may drink out of the same cup or glass with the King
of Fida (in Guinea); <q>he hath always one kept particularly
for himself; and that which hath but once
touched another's lips he never uses more, though
it be made of metal that may be cleansed by fire.</q><note place='foot'>Bosman's <q>Guinea,</q> in Pinkerton's
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, xvi. 487.</note>
Amongst the Alfoers of Celebes there is a priest called
the <foreign rend='italic'>Leleen</foreign>, whose duty appears to be to make the rice
grow. His functions begin about a month before the
rice is sown, and end after the crop is housed. During
this time he has to observe certain taboos;
amongst others he may not eat or drink with any one
else, and he may drink out of no vessel but his own.<note place='foot'>P. N. Wilken, <q>Bijdragen tot de
kennis van de zeden en gewoonten der
Alfoeren in de Minahassa,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelinggenootschap</hi>, xi. (1863) 126.</note>
</p>

<p>
We have seen that the Mikado's food was cooked
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
every day in new pots and served up in new dishes;
both pots and dishes were of common clay, in order
that they might be broken or laid aside after they had
been once used. They were generally broken, for it
was believed that if any one else ate his food out of
these sacred dishes his mouth and throat would become
swollen and inflamed. The same ill effect was
thought to be experienced by any one who should
wear the Mikado's clothes without his leave; he would
have swellings and pains all over his body.<note place='foot'>Kaempfer's <q>History of Japan,</q> in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, vii. 717.</note> In the
evil effects thus supposed to follow upon the use of
the Mikado's vessels or clothes we see that other side
of the divine king's or god-man's character to which
attention has been already called. The divine person
is a source of danger as well as of blessing; he must
not only be guarded, he must also be guarded against.
His sacred organism, so delicate that a touch may
disorder it, is also electrically charged with a powerful
spiritual force which may discharge itself with fatal
effect on whatever comes in contact with it. Hence
the isolation of the man-god is quite as necessary for
the safety of others as for his own. His divinity is a
fire, which, under proper restraints, confers endless
blessings, but, if rashly touched or allowed to break
bounds, burns and destroys what it touches.
Hence the disastrous effects supposed to attend a
breach of taboo; the offender has thrust his hand into
the divine fire, which shrivels up and consumes him
on the spot. To take an example from the taboo we
are considering. It happened that a New Zealand
chief of high rank and great sanctity had left the
remains of his dinner by the wayside. A slave, a
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
stout, hungry fellow, coming up after the chief had
gone, saw the unfinished dinner, and ate it up without
asking questions. Hardly had he finished when
he was informed by a horror-stricken spectator that
the food of which he had eaten was the chief's. <q>I
knew the unfortunate delinquent well. He was remarkable
for courage, and had signalised himself in the
wars of the tribe.... No sooner did he hear the fatal
news than he was seized by the most extraordinary
convulsions and cramp in the stomach, which never
ceased till he died, about sundown the same day. He
was a strong man, in the prime of life, and if any
pakeha [European] freethinker should have said he
was not killed by the <foreign rend='italic'>tapu</foreign> [taboo] of the chief, which
had been communicated to the food by contact, he would
have been listened to with feelings of contempt for his
ignorance and inability to understand plain and direct
evidence.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Old New Zealand</hi>, by a Pakeha
Maori (London, 1884), p. 96 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This is not a solitary case. A Maori woman
having eaten of some fruit, and being afterwards told
that the fruit had being taken from a tabooed place,
exclaimed that the spirit of the chief whose sanctity
had been thus profaned would kill her. This was in
the afternoon, and next day by twelve o'clock she was
dead.<note place='foot'>W. Brown, <hi rend='italic'>New Zealand and its
Aborigines</hi> (London, 1845), p. 76.
For more examples of the same kind
see <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> p. 77 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> An observer who knows the Maoris well, says,
<q>Tapu [taboo] is an awful weapon. I have seen a
strong young man die the same day he was tapued;
the victims die under it as though their strength ran
out as water.</q><note place='foot'>E. Tregear, <q>The Maoris of New
Zealand,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xix.
100.</note> A Maori chief's tinder-box was once
the means of killing several persons; for having been
lost by him, and found by some men who used it to
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
light their pipes, they died of fright on learning to
whom it had belonged. So too the garments of a high
New Zealand chief will kill any one else who wears
them. A chief was observed by a missionary to
throw down a precipice a blanket which he found too
heavy to carry. Being asked by the missionary why
he did not leave it on a tree for the use of a future
traveller, the chief replied that <q>it was the fear of its
being taken by another which caused him to throw
it where he did, for if it were worn, his tapu</q> (<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>
his spiritual power communicated by contact to the
blanket and through the blanket to the man) <q>would
kill the person.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>R. Taylor, Te Ika a Maui: or,
New Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
p. 164.</note>
</p>

<p>
No wonder therefore that the savage should rank
these human divinities amongst what he regards as the
dangerous classes, and should impose exactly the same
restraints upon the one as upon the other. For instance,
those who have defiled themselves by touching
a dead body are regarded by the Maoris as in a
very dangerous state, and are sedulously shunned and
isolated. But the taboos observed by and towards
these defiled persons (<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> they may not touch food
with their hands, and the vessels used by them may
not be used by other people) are identical with those
observed by and towards sacred chiefs.<note place='foot'>A. S. Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>The Story of New
Zealand</hi>, i. 101 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Old New Zealand</hi>,
by a Pakeha Maori, pp. 94, 104 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> And, in
general, the prohibition to use the dress, vessels, etc.,
of certain persons and the effects supposed to follow
an infraction of the rule are exactly the same whether
the persons to whom the things belong are sacred or
what we might call unclean and polluted. As the
garments which have been touched by a sacred chief
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
kill those who handle them, so do the things which
have been touched by a menstruous woman. An
Australian blackfellow, who discovered that his wife
had lain on his blanket at her menstrual period, killed
her and died of terror himself within a fortnight.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> ix. 458.</note>
Hence Australian women at these times are forbidden
under pain of death to touch anything that men use.
They are also secluded at child-birth, and all vessels used
by them during their seclusion are burned.<note place='foot'>W. Ridley, <q>Report on Australian
Languages and Traditions,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> ii. 268.</note> Amongst
some of the Indians of North America also women at
menstruation are forbidden to touch men's utensils,
which would be so defiled by their touch that their
subsequent use would be attended by certain mischief
or misfortune.<note place='foot'>Alexander Mackenzie, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages
from Montreal through the Continent
of North America</hi>, cxxiii.</note> Amongst the Eskimo of Alaska
no one will willingly drink out of the same cup or
eat out of the same dish that has been used by a
woman at her confinement until it has been purified
by certain incantations.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Report of the International Polar
Expedition to Point Barrow, Alaska</hi>
(Washington, 1885), p. 46.</note> Amongst some of the
Tinneh Indians of North America the dishes out
of which girls eat during their seclusion at puberty
<q>are used by no other person, and wholly devoted
to their own use.</q><note place='foot'><q>Customs of the New Caledonian
Women,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> vii.
206.</note> Again amongst some Indian
tribes of North America men who have slain enemies
are considered to be in a state of uncleanness, and
will not eat or drink out of any dish or smoke out
of any pipe but their own for a considerable time
after the slaughter, and no one will willingly use
their dishes or pipes. They live in a kind of
seclusion during this time, at the end of which all
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
the dishes and pipes used by them during their
seclusion are burned.<note place='foot'>S. Hearne, <hi rend='italic'>A Journey from Prince
of Wales's Fort in Hudson's Bay to the
Northern Ocean</hi>, p. 204 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Amongst the Kafirs, boys at
circumcision live secluded in a special hut, and when
they are healed all the vessels which they had used
during their seclusion and the boyish mantles which
they had hitherto worn are burned together with
the hut.<note place='foot'>L. Alberti, <hi rend='italic'>De Kaffers</hi> (Amsterdam,
1810), p. 76 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; H. Lichtenstein,
<hi rend='italic'>Reisen im südlichen Afrika</hi>, i.
427.</note> When a young Indian brave is out on
the war-path for the first time the vessels he eats
and drinks out of must be touched by no one else.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the Captivity and
Adventures of John Tanner</hi> (London,
1830), p. 122.</note>
</p>

<p>
Thus the rules of ceremonial purity observed by
divine kings, chiefs, and priests, by homicides, women
at child-birth, and so on, are in some respects alike.
To us these different classes of persons appear to differ
totally in character and condition; some of them we
should call holy, others we might pronounce unclean
and polluted. But the savage makes no such moral
distinction between them; the conceptions of holiness
and pollution are not yet differentiated in his mind.
To him the common feature of all these persons is
that they are dangerous and in danger, and the
danger in which they stand and to which they
expose others is what we should call spiritual or
supernatural, that is, imaginary. The danger,
however, is not less real because it is imaginary;
imagination acts upon man as really as does gravitation,
and may kill him as certainly as a dose of
prussic acid. To seclude these persons from the
rest of the world so that the dreaded spiritual danger
shall neither reach them, nor spread from them, is
the object of the taboos which they have to observe.
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
These taboos act, so to say, as electrical insulators
to preserve the spiritual force with which these
persons are charged from suffering or inflicting harm
by contact with the outer world.<note place='foot'>On the nature of taboo, see especially
W. Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of
the Semites</hi>, i. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> 427 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
No one was allowed to touch the body of the King
or Queen of Tahiti;<note place='foot'>Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>, iii. 102.</note> and no one may touch the King
of Cambodia, for any purpose whatever, without his
express command. In July 1874 the king was thrown
from his carriage and lay insensible on the ground,
but not one of his suite dared to touch him; a
European coming to the spot carried the injured
monarch to his palace.<note place='foot'>J. Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume du Cambodge</hi>,
i. 226.</note> No one may touch the King
of Corea; and if he deigns to touch a subject, the
spot touched becomes sacred, and the person thus
honoured must wear a visible mark (generally a
cord of red silk) for the rest of his life. Above
all, no iron may touch the king's body. In 1800
King Tieng-tsong-tai-oang died of a tumour in the
back, no one dreaming of employing the lancet,
which would probably have saved his life. It is
said that one king suffered terribly from an abscess
in the lip, till his physician called in a jester, whose
antics made the king laugh heartily, and so the abscess
burst.<note place='foot'>Ch. Dallet, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire de l'Église de
Corée</hi>, i. xxiv. <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Griffis, <hi rend='italic'>Corea, the
Hermit Nation</hi>, p. 219.</note> Roman and Sabine priests might not be shaved
with iron but only with bronze razors or shears;<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> v. 19, 13; Servius
on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> i. 448; Joannes
Lydus, <hi rend='italic'>De mens.</hi> i. 31.</note> and
whenever an iron graving-tool was brought into the
sacred grove of the Arval Brothers at Rome for the
purpose of cutting an inscription in stone, an expiatory
sacrifice of a lamb and a pig was offered, which was
repeated when the graving-tool was removed from the
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
grove.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Acta Fratrum Arvalium</hi>, ed. Henzen,
pp. 128-135; Marquardt, <hi rend='italic'>Römische
Staatsverwaltung</hi>, iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Das Sacralwesen</hi>),
p. 459 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Crete sacrifices were offered to Menedemus
without the use of iron, because, it was said,
Menedemus had been killed by an iron weapon in the
Trojan war.<note place='foot'>Callimachus, referred to by the Old
Scholiast on Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Ibis.</hi> See Callimachus,
ed. Blomfield, p. 216; Lobeck,
<hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, p. 686.</note> The Archon of Plataeae might not touch
iron; but once a year, at the annual commemoration
of the men who fell at the battle of Plataeae, he was
allowed to carry a sword wherewith to sacrifice a bull.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Aristides</hi>, 21. This
passage I owe to Mr. W. Wyse.</note>
To this day a Hottentot priest never uses an iron
knife, but always a sharp splint of quartz in sacrificing
an animal or circumcising a lad.<note place='foot'>Theophilus Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Tsuni-Goam,
the Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khoi</hi>,
p. 22.</note> Amongst the Moquis
of Arizona stone knives, hatchets, etc., have passed
out of common use, but are retained in religious ceremonies.<note place='foot'>J. G. Bourke, <hi rend='italic'>The Snake Dance of
the Moquis of Arizona</hi>, p. 178 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Negroes of the Gold Coast remove all iron
or steel from their person when they consult their
fetish.<note place='foot'>C. F. Gordon Cumming, <hi rend='italic'>In the
Hebrides</hi> (ed. 1883), p. 195.</note> The men who made the need-fire in Scotland
had to divest themselves of all metal.<note place='foot'>James Logan, <hi rend='italic'>The Scottish Gael</hi>
(ed. Alex. Stewart), ii. 68 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In making the
<foreign rend='italic'>clavie</foreign> (a kind of Yule-tide fire-wheel) at Burghead, no
hammer may be used; the hammering must be done
with a stone.<note place='foot'>C. F. Gordon Cumming, <hi rend='italic'>In the
Hebrides</hi>, p. 226; E. J. Guthrie, <hi rend='italic'>Old
Scottish Customs</hi>, p. 223.</note> Amongst the Jews no iron tool was
used in building the temple at Jerusalem or in making
an altar.<note place='foot'>1 Kings vi. 7; Exodus xx. 25.</note> The old wooden bridge (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pons Sublicius</foreign>) at
Rome, which was considered sacred, was made and
had to be kept in repair without the use of iron or
bronze.<note place='foot'>Dionysius Halicarn. <hi rend='italic'>Antiquit.
Roman</hi>, iii. 45, v. 24; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Numa</hi>,
9; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxxvi. § 100.</note> It was expressly provided by law that the
temple of Jupiter Liber at Furfo might be repaired
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
with iron tools.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Acta Fratrum Arvalium</hi>, ed. Henzen,
p. 132; <hi rend='italic'>Corpus Inscriptionum
Latinarum</hi>, i. No. 603.</note> The council chamber at Cyzicus was
constructed of wood without any iron nails, the beams
being so arranged that they could be taken out and
replaced.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> The late Raja Vijyanagram, a member
of the Viceroy's Council, and described as one of
the most enlightened and estimable of Hindu princes,
would not allow iron to be used in the construction
of buildings within his territory, believing that its use
would inevitably be followed by small-pox and other
epidemics.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, x. (1881)
364.</note>
</p>

<p>
This superstitious objection to iron perhaps dates
from that early time in the history of society when
iron was still a novelty, and as such was viewed by
many with suspicion and dislike. For everything new
is apt to excite the awe and dread of the savage.
<q>It is a curious superstition,</q> says a recent pioneer
in Borneo, <q>this of the Dusuns, to attribute anything&mdash;whether
good or bad, lucky or unlucky&mdash;that happens
to them to something novel which has arrived in their
country. For instance, my living in Kindram has
caused the intensely hot weather we have experienced
of late.</q><note place='foot'>Frank Hatton, <hi rend='italic'>North Borneo</hi>
(1886), p. 233.</note> The first introduction of iron ploughshares
into Poland having been followed by a succession of
bad harvests, the farmers attributed the badness of the
crops to the iron ploughshares, and discarded them
for the old wooden ones.<note place='foot'>Alexand. Guagninus, <q>De ducatu
Samogitiae,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Respublica sive Status
Regni Poloniae, Lituaniae, Prussiae,
Livoniae</hi> etc. (Elzevir, 1627), p. 276;
Johan. Lasicius, <q>De diis Samogitarum
caeterorumque Sarmatum,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Respublica</hi>, etc. (<hi rend='italic'>ut supra</hi>), p. 294
(p. 84 ed. Mannhardt, in <hi rend='italic'>Magazin
herausgeg. von der Lettisch-Literär.
Gesellsch.</hi> bd. xiv.)</note> The general dislike of
innovation, which always makes itself strongly felt
in the sphere of religion, is sufficient by itself to
<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>
account for the superstitious aversion to iron entertained
by kings and priests and attributed by them
to the gods; possibly this aversion may have been
intensified in places by some such accidental cause as
the series of bad seasons which cast discredit on iron
ploughshares in Poland. But the disfavour in which
iron is held by the gods and their ministers has another
side. The very fact that iron is deemed obnoxious to
spirits furnishes men with a weapon which may be
turned against the spirits when occasion serves. As
their dislike of iron is supposed to be so great that
they will not approach persons and things protected
by the obnoxious metal, iron may obviously be employed
as a charm for banning ghosts and other dangerous
spirits. And it often is so used. Thus when Scotch
fishermen were at sea, and one of them happened
to take the name of God in vain, the first man who
heard him called out <q>Cauld airn,</q> at which every
man of the crew grasped the nearest bit of iron and
held it between his hands for a while.<note place='foot'>E. J. Guthrie, <hi rend='italic'>Old Scottish Customs</hi>,
p. 149; Ch. Rogers, <hi rend='italic'>Social Life in Scotland</hi>
(London, 1886), iii. 218.</note> In Morocco
iron is considered a great protection against demons;
hence it is usual to place a knife or dagger under
a sick man's pillow.<note place='foot'>A. Leared, <hi rend='italic'>Morocco and the Moors</hi>,
p. 273.</note> In India <q>the mourner who
performs the ceremony of putting fire into the dead
person's mouth carries with him a piece of iron: it
may be a key or a knife, or a simple piece of iron, and
during the whole time of his separation (for he is
unclean for a certain time, and no one will either touch
him or eat or drink with him, neither can he change
his clothes<note place='foot'>The reader may observe how closely
the taboos laid upon mourners resemble
those laid upon kings. From what has
gone before the reason of the resemblance
is obvious.</note>) he carries the piece of iron about with
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
him to keep off the evil spirit. In Calcutta the Bengali
clerks in the Government Offices used to wear a small
key on one of their fingers when they had been chief
mourners.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, iii. No.
282.</note> In the north-east of Scotland immediately
after a death had taken place, a piece of iron, such as
a nail or a knitting-wire, used to be stuck into all the
meal, butter, cheese, flesh, and whisky in the house,
<q>to prevent death from entering them.</q> The neglect
of this precaution is said to have been closely followed
by the corruption of the food and drink; the whisky
has been known to become as white as milk.<note place='foot'>Walter Gregor, <hi rend='italic'>The Folk-lore of
the North-East of Scotland</hi>, p. 206.</note> When
iron is used as a protective charm after a death, as in
these Hindu and Scotch customs, the spirit against
which it is directed is the ghost of the deceased.<note place='foot'>This is expressly said in <hi rend='italic'>Panjab
Notes and Queries</hi>, iii. No. 846. On
iron as a protective charm see also
Liebrecht, <hi rend='italic'>Gervasius von Tilbury</hi>, p.
99 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde</hi>, p. 311;
L. Strackerjan, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube und Sagen
aus dem Herzogthum Oldenburg</hi>, § 233;
Wattke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>, §
414 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Tylor, <hi rend='italic'>Primitive Culture</hi>, i. 140;
Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Der Baumkultus</hi>, 132 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
There is a priestly king to the north of Zengwih in
Burma, revered by the Sotih as the highest spiritual
and temporal authority, into whose house no weapon
or cutting instrument may be brought.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des ostlichen
Asien</hi>, i. 136.</note> This rule
may perhaps be explained by a custom observed by
various peoples after a death; they refrain from the
use of sharp instruments so long as the ghost of the
deceased is supposed to be near, lest they should
wound it. Thus after a death the Roumanians of
Transylvania are careful not to leave a knife lying
with the sharp edge uppermost as long as the corpse
remains in the house, <q>or else the soul will be
forced to ride on the blade.</q><note place='foot'>E. Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>The Land beyond the
Forest</hi>, i. 312; W. Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Das Jahr
und seine Tage in Meinung und Brauch
der Romänen Siebenbürgens</hi>, p. 40.</note> For seven days
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
after a death, the corpse being still in the house, the
Chinese abstain from the use of knives and needles,
and even of chopsticks, eating their food with their
fingers.<note place='foot'>J. H. Gray, <hi rend='italic'>China</hi>, i. 288.</note> Amongst the Innuit (Eskimos) of Alaska
for four days after a death the women in the village
do no sewing, and for five days the men do not
cut wood with an axe.<note place='foot'>W. H. Dall, <hi rend='italic'>Alaska and its Resources</hi>,
p. 146; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> in <hi rend='italic'>American
Naturalist</hi>, xii. 7.</note> On the third, sixth, ninth,
and fortieth days after the funeral the old Prussians
and Lithuanians used to prepare a meal, to which,
standing at the door, they invited the soul of the
deceased. At these meals they sat silent round the
table and used no knives, and the women who served
up the food were also without knives. If any morsels
fell from the table they were left lying there for the
lonely souls that had no living relations or friends to
feed them. When the meal was over the priest took
a broom and swept the souls out of the house, saying,
<q>Dear souls, ye have eaten and drunk. Go forth, go
forth.</q><note place='foot'>Jo. Meletius, <q>De religione et
sacrificiis veterum Borussorum,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>De
Russorum Muscovitarum et Tartarorum
religione, sacrificiis, nuptiarum,
funerum ritu</hi> (Spires, 1582), p. 263;
Hartknoch, <hi rend='italic'>Alt und neues Preussen</hi>
(Frankfort and Leipzig, 1684), p. 187
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In cutting the nails and combing the hair of
a dead prince in South Celebes only the back of the
knife and of the comb may be used.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</hi>, p. 136.</note> The Germans
say that a knife should not be left edge upwards,
because God and the spirits dwell there, or because
it will cut the face of God and the angels.<note place='foot'>Tettau und Temme, <hi rend='italic'>Die Volkssagen
Ostpreussens, Litthauens und Westpreussens</hi>,
p. 285; Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> iii. 454; cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> pp. 441,
469; Grohmann, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglauben und
Gebräuche aus Böhmen und Mähren</hi>,
p. 198.</note> We can
now understand why no cutting instrument may be
taken into the house of the Burmese pontiff. Like so
many priestly kings, he is probably regarded as divine,
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
and it is therefore right that his sacred spirit should
not be exposed to the risk of being cut or wounded
whenever it quits his body to hover invisible in the
air or to fly on some distant mission.
</p>

<p>
We have seen that the Flamen Dialis was forbidden
to touch or even name raw flesh.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Rom.</hi> 110; Aulus
Gellius, x. 15, 12.</note> In the
Pelew Islands when a raid has been made on a village
and a head carried off, the relations of the slain man
are tabooed and have to submit to certain observances
in order to escape the wrath of his ghost. They are
shut up in the house, touch no raw flesh, and chew
beetel over which an incantation has been uttered by
the exorcist. After this the ghost of the slaughtered
man goes away to the enemy's country in pursuit of
his murderer.<note place='foot'>J. Kubary, <hi rend='italic'>Die socialen Einrichtungen
der Pelauer</hi> (Berlin, 1885), p.
126 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The taboo is probably based on the
common belief that the soul or spirit of the animal
is in the blood. As tabooed persons are believed to
be in a perilous state&mdash;for example, the relations of
the slain man are liable to the attacks of his indignant
ghost&mdash;it is especially necessary to isolate
them from contact with spirits; hence the prohibition
to touch raw meat. But as usual the taboo is only
the special enforcement in particular circumstances
of a general rule; in other words, its observance is
particularly enjoined in circumstances which are supposed
especially to call for its application, but apart
from such special circumstances the prohibition is also
observed, though less strictly, as an ordinary rule of
life. Thus some of the Esthonians will not taste
blood because they believe that it contains the animal's
soul, which would enter the body of the person who
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
tasted the blood.<note place='foot'>F. J. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem inneren
und äussern Leben der Ehsten</hi> (St.
Petersburg, 1876), pp. 448, 478.</note> Some Indian tribes of North
America, <q>through a strong principle of religion,
abstain in the strictest manner from eating the blood
of any animal, as it contains the life and spirit of the
beast.</q> These Indians <q>commonly pull their new-killed
venison (before they dress it) several times
through the smoke and flame of the fire, both by the
way of a sacrifice and to consume the blood, life, or
animal spirits of the beast, which with them would be
a most horrid abomination to eat.</q><note place='foot'>James Adair, <hi rend='italic'>History of the American
Indians</hi>, pp. 134, 117.</note> Many of the
Slave, Hare, and Dogrib Indians scruple to taste the
blood of game; hunters of the former tribes collect the
blood in the animal's paunch and bury it in the snow.<note place='foot'>E. Petitot, <hi rend='italic'>Monographie des Dènè-Dindjié</hi>,
p. 76.</note>
Jewish hunters poured out the blood of the game
they had killed and covered it up with dust. They
would not taste the blood, believing that the soul or
life of the animal was in the blood, or actually was the
blood.<note place='foot'>Leviticus xvii. 10-14. The Hebrew
word translated <q>life</q> in the English
version of verse 11 means also <q>soul</q>
(marginal note in the Revised Version).
Cp. Deuteronomy xii. 23-25.</note> The same belief was held by the Romans,<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> v. 79; cp.
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> on <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iii. 67.</note>
and is shared by the Arabs,<note place='foot'>J. Wellhausen, <hi rend='italic'>Reste Arabischen
Heidentumes</hi>, p. 217.</note> and by some of the
Papuan tribes of New Guinea.<note place='foot'>A. Goudswaard, <hi rend='italic'>De Papoewa's van
de Geelvinksbaai</hi> (Schiedam, 1863), p. 77.</note>
</p>

<p>
It is a common rule that royal blood must not be
shed upon the ground. Hence when a king or one of
his family is to be put to death a mode of execution is
devised by which the royal blood shall not be spilt
upon the earth. About the year 1688 the generalissimo
of the army rebelled against the King of Siam
and put him to death <q>after the manner of royal
criminals, or as princes of the blood are treated when
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
convicted of capital crimes, which is by putting them
into a large iron caldron, and pounding them to pieces
with wooden pestles, because none of their royal blood
must be spilt on the ground, it being, by their religion,
thought great impiety to contaminate the divine blood
by mixing it with earth.</q><note place='foot'>Hamilton's <q>Account of the East
Indies,</q> in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and
Travels</hi>, viii. 469. Cp. W. Robertson
Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Semites</hi>, i. 349,
<hi rend='italic'>note</hi> 2.</note> Other Siamese modes of
executing a royal person are starvation, suffocation,
stretching him on a scarlet cloth and thrusting a billet
of odoriferous <q>saunders wood</q> into his stomach,<note place='foot'>De la Loubere, <hi rend='italic'>A New Historical
Account of the Kingdom of Siam</hi> (London,
1693), p. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> or
lastly, sewing him up in a leather sack with a large
stone and throwing him into the river; sometimes
the sufferer's neck is broken with sandal-wood clubs
before he is thrown into the water.<note place='foot'>Pallegoix, <hi rend='italic'>Description du Royaume
Thai ou Siam</hi>, i. 271, 365 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> When Kublai Khan
defeated and took his uncle Nayan, who had rebelled
against him, he caused Nayan to be put to death by
being wrapt in a carpet and tossed to and fro till he
died, <q>because he would not have the blood of his Line
Imperial spilt upon the ground or exposed in the eye of
Heaven and before the Sun.</q><note place='foot'>Marco Polo, trans. by Col. H.
Yule (2d ed. 1875), i. 335.</note> <q>Friar Ricold mentions
the Tartar maxim: <q>One Khan will put another
to death to get possession of the throne, but he takes
great care that the blood be not spilt. For they say
that it is highly improper that the blood of the Great
Khan should be spilt upon the ground; so they cause
the victim to be smothered somehow or other.</q> The
like feeling prevails at the court of Burma, where a
peculiar mode of execution without bloodshed is
reserved for princes of the blood.</q><note place='foot'>Col. H. Yule on Marco Polo, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> In Tonquin the
ordinary mode of execution is beheading, but persons of
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
the blood royal are strangled.<note place='foot'>Baron's <q>Description of the Kingdom
of Tonqueen,</q> in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages
and Travels</hi>, ix. 691.</note> In Ashantee the blood
of none of the royal family may be shed; if one of
them is guilty of a great crime he is drowned in the
river Dah.<note place='foot'>T. E. Bowdich, <hi rend='italic'>Mission from Cape
Coast Castle to Ashantee</hi> (London, 1873),
p. 207.</note> In Madagascar the blood of nobles might
not be shed; hence when four Christians of that class
were to be executed they were burned alive.<note place='foot'>Sibree, <hi rend='italic'>Madagascar and its People</hi>,
p. 430.</note> When
a young king of Uganda comes of age all his brothers
are burnt except two or three, who are preserved to
keep up the succession.<note place='foot'>C. T. Wilson and R. W. Felkin,
<hi rend='italic'>Uganda and the Egyptian Soudan</hi>, i.
200.</note> The reluctance to shed royal
blood seems to be only a particular case of a general
reluctance to shed blood or at least to allow it to fall
on the ground. Marco Polo tells us that in his day
persons found on the streets of Cambaluc (Pekin) at
unseasonable hours were arrested, and if found guilty
of a misdemeanour were beaten with a stick. <q>Under
this punishment people sometimes die, but they adopt
it in order to eschew bloodshed, for their <foreign rend='italic'>Bacsis</foreign> say
that it is an evil thing to shed man's blood.</q><note place='foot'>Marco Polo, i. 399, Yule's translation,
2d ed.</note> When
Captain Christian was shot by the Manx Government
at the Restoration in 1660, the spot on which he stood
was covered with white blankets, that his blood might
not fall on the ground.<note place='foot'>Sir Walter Scott, note 2 to <hi rend='italic'>Peveril
of the Peak</hi>, ch. v.</note> Amongst some primitive
peoples, when the blood of a tribesman has to be shed
it is not suffered to fall upon the ground, but is
received upon the bodies of his fellow tribesmen.
Thus in some Australian tribes boys who are being
circumcised are laid on a platform, formed by the
living bodies of the tribesmen;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>,
p. 230; E. J. Eyre, <hi rend='italic'>Journals of Expeditions
of Discovery into Central Australia</hi>,
ii. 335; Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of
Victoria</hi>, i. 75 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> and when a boy's tooth
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
is knocked out as an initiatory ceremony, he is seated
on the shoulders of a man, on whose breast the blood
flows and may not be wiped away.<note place='foot'>Collins, <hi rend='italic'>Account of the English
Colony of New South Wales</hi> (London,
1798), p. 580.</note> When Australian
blacks bleed each other as a cure for headache, and so
on, they are very careful not to spill any of the blood on
the ground, but sprinkle it on each other.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>,
p. 224 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Angas, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Life and
Scenes in Australia and New Zealand</hi>,
i. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We have
already seen that in the Australian ceremony for
making rain the blood which is supposed to imitate
the rain is received upon the bodies of the tribesmen.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>.</note>
In South Celebes at child-birth a female slave stands
under the house (the houses being raised on posts
above the ground) and receives in a basin on her head
the blood which trickles through the bamboo floor.<note place='foot'>B. F. Matthes, <hi rend='italic'>Bijdragen tot de
Ethnologie van Zuid-Celebes</hi>, p. 53.</note>
The unwillingness to shed blood is extended by some
peoples to the blood of animals. When the Wanika
in Eastern Africa kill their cattle for food, <q>they either
stone or beat the animal to death, so as not to shed
the blood.</q><note place='foot'>Lieut. Emery, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the R.
Geogr. Soc.</hi> iii. 282.</note> Amongst the Damaras cattle killed for
food are suffocated, but when sacrificed they are
speared to death.<note place='foot'>Ch. Andersson, <hi rend='italic'>Lake Ngami</hi>, p.
224.</note> But like most pastoral tribes in
Africa, both the Wanika and Damaras very seldom
kill their cattle, which are indeed commonly invested
with a kind of sanctity.<note place='foot'>Ch. New, <hi rend='italic'>Life, Wanderings, and
Labours in Eastern Africa</hi>, p. 124;
Francis Galton, <q>Domestication of
Animals,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Transactions of the Ethnolog.
Soc. of London</hi>, iii. 135. On the
original sanctity of domestic animals,
see above all W. Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>The
Religion of the Semites</hi>, i. 263 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 277
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In killing an animal for food
the Easter Islanders do not shed its blood, but stun it
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
or suffocate it in smoke.<note place='foot'>L. Linton Palmer, <q>A Visit to
Easter Island,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. R. Geogr.
Soc.</hi> xl. (1870) 171.</note> The explanation of the
reluctance to shed blood on the ground is probably to
be found in the belief that the soul is in the blood, and
that therefore any ground on which it may fall necessarily
becomes taboo or sacred. In New Zealand
anything upon which even a drop of a high chief's
blood chances to fall becomes taboo or sacred to him.
For instance, a party of natives having come to visit
a chief in a fine new canoe, the chief got into it, but in
doing so a splinter entered his foot, and the blood
trickled on the canoe, which at once became sacred to
him. The owner jumped out, dragged the canoe
ashore opposite the chief's house, and left it there.
Again, a chief in entering a missionary's house knocked
his head against a beam, and the blood flowed. The
natives said that in former times the house would have
belonged to the chief.<note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui; or, New
Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 164 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> As usually happens with
taboos of universal application, the prohibition to spill
the blood of a tribesman on the ground applies
with peculiar stringency to chiefs and kings, and
is observed in their case long after it has ceased to
be observed in the case of others.
</p>

<p>
We have seen that the Flamen Dialis was not
allowed to walk under a trellised vine.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Rom.</hi> 112;
Aulus Gellius, x. 15, 13.</note> The reason
for this prohibition was perhaps as follows. It has been
shown that plants are considered as animate beings
which bleed when cut, the red juice which exudes from
some plants being regarded as the blood of the plant.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The juice of the grape is therefore naturally conceived
as the blood of the vine.<note place='foot'>Cp. W. Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
p. 213 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> And since, as we have just
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
seen, the soul is often believed to be in the blood, the
juice of the grape is regarded as the soul, or as
containing the soul, of the vine. This belief is
strengthened by the intoxicating effects of wine.
For, according to primitive notions, all abnormal
mental states, such as intoxication or madness, are
caused by the entrance of a spirit into the person;
such mental states, in other words, are regarded as
forms of possession or inspiration. Wine, therefore,
is considered on two distinct grounds as a spirit or
containing a spirit; first because, as a red juice, it is
identified with the blood of the plant, and second
because it intoxicates or inspires. Therefore if the
Flamen Dialis had walked under a trellised vine, the
spirit of the vine, embodied in the clusters of grapes,
would have been immediately over his head and might
have touched it, which for a person like him in a state
of permanent taboo<note place='foot'><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dialis cotidie feriatus est</foreign>, Aulus Gellius, x. 15, 16.</note> would have been highly dangerous.
This interpretation of the prohibition will be
made probable if we can show, first, that wine has
been actually viewed by some peoples as blood
and intoxication as inspiration produced by drinking
the blood; and, second, that it is often considered
dangerous, especially for tabooed persons, to have
either blood or a living person over their heads.
</p>

<p>
With regard to the first point, we are informed by
Plutarch that of old the Egyptian kings neither drank
wine nor offered it in libations to the gods, because
they held it to be the blood of beings who had once
fought against the gods, the vine having sprung from
their rotting bodies; and the frenzy of intoxication was
explained by the supposition that the drunken man was
<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>
filled with the blood of the enemies of the gods.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, c. 6.
A myth apparently akin to this has
been preserved in some native Egyptian
writings. See Ad. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten
und aegyptisches Leben im Altertum</hi>, p.
364.</note> The
Aztecs regarded <foreign rend='italic'>pulque</foreign> or the wine of the country as
bad, on account of the wild deeds which men did under
its influence. But these wild deeds were believed to
be the acts, not of the drunken man, but of the wine-god
by whom he was possessed and inspired; and so
seriously was this theory of inspiration held that if any
one spoke ill of or insulted a tipsy man, he was liable
to be punished for disrespect to the wine-god incarnate
in his votary. Hence, says Sahagun, it was believed,
not without ground, that the Indians intoxicated themselves
on purpose to commit with impunity crimes
for which they would certainly have been punished if
they had committed them sober.<note place='foot'>Bernardino de Sahagun, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
générale des choses de la Nouvelle-Espagne</hi>,
traduite par Jourdanet et
Siméon (Paris, 1880), p. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus it appears
that on the primitive view intoxication or the inspiration
produced by wine is exactly parallel to the inspiration
produced by drinking the blood of animals.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The soul or life is in the blood, and wine is the blood
of the vine. Hence whoever drinks the blood of an
animal is inspired with the soul of the animal or of the
god, who, as we have seen,<note place='foot'>P. <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>.</note> is often supposed to enter
into the animal before it is slain; and whoever drinks
wine drinks the blood, and so receives into himself
the soul or spirit, of the god of the vine.
</p>

<p>
With regard to the second point, the fear of passing
under blood or under a living person, we are told that
some of the Australian blacks have a dread of passing
under a leaning tree or even under the rails of a
fence. The reason they give is that a woman may
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
have been upon the tree or fence, and some blood
from her may have fallen on it and might fall from it
on them.<note place='foot'>E. M. Curr, <hi rend='italic'>The Australian Race</hi>
(Melbourne and London, 1887), iii.
179.</note> In Ugi, one of the Solomon Islands, a
man will never, if he can help it, pass under a tree
which has fallen across the path, for the reason that
a woman may have stepped over it before him.<note place='foot'>H. B. Guppy, <hi rend='italic'>The Solomon
Islands and their Natives</hi> (London,
1887), p. 41.</note>
Amongst the Karens of Burma <q>going under a house,
especially if there are females within, is avoided; as
is also the passing under trees of which the branches
extend downwards in a particular direction, and the
butt-end of fallen trees, etc.</q><note place='foot'>E. B. Cross, <q>On the Karens,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the American Oriental
Society</hi>, iv. (1854) 312.</note> The Siamese think it
unlucky to pass under a rope on which women's clothes
are hung, and to avert evil consequences the person
who has done so must build a chapel to the earth-spirit.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen
Asien</hi>, iii. 230.</note>
</p>

<p>
Probably in all such cases the rule is based on a
fear of being brought into contact with blood, especially
the blood of women. From a like fear a Maori
will never lean his back against the wall of a native
house.<note place='foot'>For the reason see Shortland,
<hi rend='italic'>Traditions and Superstitions of the
New Zealanders</hi>, pp. 112 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 292.</note> For the blood of women is believed to have
disastrous effects upon males. In the Encounter Bay
tribe of South Australia boys are warned that if they
see the blood of women they will early become gray-headed
and their strength will fail prematurely.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Native Tribes of South Australia</hi>,
p. 186.</note> Men
of the Booandik tribe think that if they see the blood
of their women they will not be able to fight against
their enemies and will be killed; if the sun dazzles
their eyes at a fight, the first woman they afterwards
meet is sure to get a blow from their club.<note place='foot'>Mrs. James Smith, <hi rend='italic'>The Booandik
Tribe</hi>, p. 5.</note> In the
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
island of Wetar it is thought that if a man or a lad
comes upon a woman's blood he will be unfortunate in
war and other undertakings, and that any precautions
he may take to avoid the misfortune will be vain.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, p.
450.</note>
The people of Ceram also believe that men who see
women's blood will be wounded in battle.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 139; cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> p.
209.</note> Similarly
the Ovahereró (Damaras) of South Africa think that
if they see a lying-in woman shortly after child-birth
they will become weaklings and will be shot when
they go to war.<note place='foot'>E. Dannert, <q>Customs of the
Ovaherero at the Birth of a Child.</q> in
(South African) <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, ii.
63.</note> It is an Esthonian belief that men
who see women's blood will suffer from an eruption
on the skin.<note place='foot'>F. J. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem innern
und äussern Leben der Ehsten</hi>, p. 475.</note>
</p>

<p>
Again, the reason for not passing under dangerous
objects, like a vine or women's blood, is a fear that
they may come in contact with the head; for among
primitive people the head is peculiarly sacred. The
special sanctity attributed to it is sometimes explained
by a belief that it is the seat of a spirit which is
very sensitive to injury or disrespect. Thus the
Karens suppose that a being called the <foreign rend='italic'>tso</foreign> resides in
the upper part of the head, and while it retains its
seat no harm can befall the person from the efforts of
the seven <foreign rend='italic'>Kelahs</foreign>, or personified passions. <q>But if
the <hi rend='italic'>tso</hi> becomes heedless or weak certain evil to the
person is the result. Hence the head is carefully
attended to, and all possible pains are taken to provide
such dress and attire as will be pleasing to the <foreign rend='italic'>tso</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>E. B. Cross, <q>On the Karens,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Journal of the American Oriental Society</hi>,
iv. 311 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The Siamese think that a spirit called <foreign rend='italic'>Khuan</foreign>, or <foreign rend='italic'>Chom
Kuan</foreign>, dwells in the human head, of which it is the
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
guardian spirit. The spirit must be carefully protected
from injury of every kind; hence the act of shaving
or cutting the hair is accompanied with many ceremonies.
The <foreign rend='italic'>Khuan</foreign> is very sensitive on points of
honour, and would feel mortally insulted if the head
in which he resides were touched by the hand of a
stranger. When Dr. Bastian, in conversation with a
brother of the king of Siam, raised his hand to touch
the prince's skull in order to illustrate some medical
remarks he was making, a sullen and threatening
murmur bursting from the lips of the crouching
courtiers warned him of the breach of etiquette he had
committed, for in Siam there is no greater insult to a
man of rank than to touch his head. If a Siamese
touch the head of another with his foot, both of them
must build chapels to the earth-spirit to avert the
omen. Nor does the guardian spirit of the head like
to have the hair washed too often; it might injure or
incommode him. It was a grand solemnity when the
king of Burmah's head was washed with water taken
from the middle of the river. Whenever the native
professor, from whom Dr. Bastian took lessons in
Burmese at Mandalay, had his head washed, which
took place as a rule once a month, he was generally
absent for three days together, that time being consumed
in preparing for, and recovering from, the
operation of head-washing. Dr. Bastian's custom of
washing his head daily gave rise to much remark.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker des östlichen Asien</hi>, ii. 256, iii. 71, 230, 235 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Again, the Burmese think it an indignity to have
any one, especially a woman, over their heads, and for
this reason Burmese houses have never more than one
story. The houses are raised on posts above the
ground, and whenever anything fell through the floor
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
Dr. Bastian had always difficulty in persuading a
servant to fetch it from under the house. In Rangoon
a priest, summoned to the bedside of a sick man,
climbed up a ladder and got in at the window rather
than ascend the staircase, to reach which he must have
passed under a gallery. A pious Burman of Rangoon,
finding some images of Buddha in a ship's cabin,
offered a high price for them, that they might not be
degraded by sailors walking over them on the deck.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 150; Sangermano,
<hi rend='italic'>Description of the Burmese Empire</hi>
(Rangoon, 1885), p. 131; C. F. S.
Forbes, <hi rend='italic'>British Burma</hi>, p. 334; Shway
Yoe, <hi rend='italic'>The Burman</hi>, i. 91.</note>
Similarily the Cambodians esteem it a grave offence
to touch a man's head; some of them will not enter a
place where anything whatever is suspended over
their heads; and the meanest Cambodian would never
consent to live under an inhabited room. Hence the
houses are built of one story only; and even the
Government respects the prejudice by never placing
a prisoner in the stocks under the floor of a house,
though the houses are raised high above the ground.<note place='foot'>J. Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume du Cambodge</hi>,
i. 178, 388.</note>
The same superstition exists amongst the Malays;
for an early traveller reports that in Java people <q>wear
nothing on their heads, and say that nothing must
be on their heads ... and if any person were to put
his hand upon their head they would kill him; and
they do not build houses with storeys, in order that
they may not walk over each other's heads.</q><note place='foot'>Duarte Barbosa, <hi rend='italic'>Description of the
Coasts of East Africa and Malabar in
the beginning of the Sixteenth Century</hi>
(Hakluyt Society, 1866), p. 197.</note> It is
also found in full force throughout Polynesia. Thus
of Gattanewa, a Marquesan chief, it is said that <q>to
touch the top of his head, or any thing which had been
on his head was sacrilege. To pass over his head
<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>
was an indignity never to be forgotten. Gattanewa,
nay, all his family, scorned to pass a gateway which
is ever closed, or a house with a door; all must be
as open and free as their unrestrained manners. He
would pass under nothing that had been raised by
the hand of man, if there was a possibility of getting
round or over it. Often have I seen him walk the
whole length of our barrier, in preference to passing
between our water-casks; and at the risk of his life
scramble over the loose stones of a wall, rather than
go through the gateway.</q><note place='foot'>David Porter, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of a Cruise
made to the Pacific Ocean in the U.S.
Frigate Essex</hi> (New York, 1822), ii. 65.</note> Marquesan women have
been known to refuse to go on the decks of ships for
fear of passing over the heads of chiefs who might be
below.<note place='foot'>Vincendon-Dumoulin et Desgraz,
<hi rend='italic'>Iles Marquises</hi>, p. 262.</note> But it was not the Marquesan chiefs only
whose heads were sacred; the head of every Marquesan
was taboo, and might neither be touched nor
stepped over by another; even a father might not
step over the head of his sleeping child.<note place='foot'>Langsdorff, <hi rend='italic'>Reise um die Welt</hi>, i.
115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> No one
was allowed to be over the head of the king of
Tonga.<note place='foot'>Capt. James Cook, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages</hi>, v. 427
(ed. 1809).</note> In Hawaii (the Sandwich Islands) if a man
climbed upon a chief's house or upon the wall of his
yard, he was put to death; if his shadow fell on a
chief, he was put to death; if he walked in the shadow
of a chief's house with his head painted white or
decked with a garland or wetted with water, he was
put to death.<note place='foot'>Jules Remy, <hi rend='italic'>Ka Mooolelo Hawaii,
Histoire de L'Archipel Havaiien</hi> (Paris
and Leipzig, 1862), p. 159.</note> In Tahiti any one who stood over
the king or queen, or passed his hand over their
heads, might be put to death.<note place='foot'>Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>, iii.
102.</note> Until certain rites
were performed over it, a Tahitian infant was
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
especially taboo; whatever touched the child's head,
while it was in this state, became sacred and was
deposited in a consecrated place railed in for the
purpose at the child's house. If a branch of a tree
touched the child's head, the tree was cut down;
and if in its fall it injured another tree so as to
penetrate the bark, that tree also was cut down as
unclean and unfit for use. After the rites were performed,
these special taboos ceased; but the head of
a Tahitian was always sacred, he never carried anything
on it, and to touch it was an offence.<note place='foot'>James Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>A Missionary Voyage
to the Southern Pacific Ocean</hi> (London,
1799). p. 354 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
head of a Maori chief was so sacred that <q>if he
only touched it with his fingers, he was obliged
immediately to apply them to his nose, and snuff up
the sanctity which they had acquired by the touch,
and thus restore it to the part from whence it was
taken.</q><note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>Te Ika a Maui: or,
New Zealand and its Inhabitants</hi>, p. 165.</note> In some circumstances the tabooed person
is forbidden to touch his head at all. Thus in North
America, Tinneh girls at puberty, Creek lads during
the year of their initiation into manhood, and young
braves on their first war-path, are forbidden to scratch
their heads with their fingers, and are provided with
a stick for the purpose.<note place='foot'><q>Customs of the New Caledonian
Women,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi>
vii. 206; B. Hawkins, <q>Sketch of the
Creek Country,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Collections of the
Georgia Historical Society</hi>, iii. pt. i.
(Savannah, 1848), p. 78; A. S.
Gatschet, <hi rend='italic'>Migration Legend of the
Creek Indians</hi>, i. 185; <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of
the Captivity and Adventures of John
Tanner</hi> (London, 1830), p. 122;
Kohl, <hi rend='italic'>Kitschi-Gami</hi>, ii. 168.</note> But to return to the Maoris.
On account of the sacredness of his head <q>a chief
could not blow the fire with his mouth, for the breath
being sacred, communicated his sanctity to it, and a
brand might be taken by a slave, or a man of another
tribe, or the fire might be used for other purposes,
<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>
such as cooking, and so cause his death.</q><note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> It is a
crime for a sacred person in New Zealand to leave
his comb, or anything else which has touched his
head, in a place where food has been cooked, or to
suffer another person to drink out of any vessel
which has touched his lips. Hence when a chief
wishes to drink he never puts his lips to the vessel,
but holds his hands close to his mouth so as to
form a hollow, into which water is poured by another
person, and thence is allowed to flow into his mouth.
If a light is needed for his pipe, the burning ember
taken from the fire must be thrown away as soon as it
is used; for the pipe becomes sacred because it has
touched his mouth; the coal becomes sacred because
it has touched the pipe; and if a particle of the sacred
cinder were replaced on the common fire, the fire
would also become sacred and could no longer be
used for cooking.<note place='foot'>E. Shortland, <hi rend='italic'>The Southern Districts
of New Zealand</hi>, p. 293; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions
and Superstitions of the New
Zealanders</hi>, p. 107, <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Some Maori chiefs, like other
Polynesians, object to go down into a ship's cabin
from fear of people passing over their heads.<note place='foot'>J. Dumont D'Urville, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage
autour du Monde et à la recherche de La
Pérouse, exécuté sous son commandement
sur la corvette Astrolabe. Histoire du
Voyage</hi>, ii. 534.</note> Dire
misfortune was thought by the Maoris to await those
who entered a house where any article of animal food
was suspended over their heads. <q>A dead pigeon,
or a piece of pork hung from the roof was a better
protection from molestation than a sentinel.</q><note place='foot'>R. A. Cruise, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of a Ten
Months' Residence in New Zealand</hi>
(London, 1823), p. 187; Dumont
D'Urville, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 533; E. Shortland,
<hi rend='italic'>The Southern Districts of New
Zealand</hi> (London, 1851), p. 30.</note> If
I am right, the reason for the special objection to
having animal food over the head is the fear of
bringing the sacred head into contact with the spirit
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
of the animal; just as the reason why the Flamen Dialis
might not walk under a vine was the fear of bringing
his sacred head into contact with the spirit of the vine.
</p>

<p>
When the head was considered so sacred that it
might not even be touched without grave offence, it is
obvious that the cutting of the hair must have been
a delicate and difficult operation. The difficulties and
dangers which, on the primitive view, beset the
operation are of two kinds. There is first the danger
of disturbing the spirit of the head, which may be
injured in the process and may revenge itself upon the
person who molests him. Secondly, there is the
difficulty of disposing of the shorn locks. For the
savage believes that the sympathetic connection which
exists between himself and every part of his body
continues to exist even after the physical connection
has been severed, and that therefore he will suffer
from any harm that may befall the severed parts of
his body, such as the clippings of his hair or the
parings of his nails. Accordingly he takes care that
these severed portions of himself shall not be left in
places where they might either be exposed to accidental
injury or fall into the hands of malicious
persons who might work magic on them to his
detriment or death. Such dangers are common to
all, but sacred persons have more to fear from them
than ordinary people, so the precautions taken by
them are proportionately stringent. The simplest
way of evading the danger is of course not to cut
the hair at all; and this is the expedient adopted
where the danger is thought to be more than usually
great. The Frankish kings were not allowed to cut
their hair.<note place='foot'>Agathias i. 3; Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Rechtsalterthümer</hi>, p. 239 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> A Haida medicine-man may neither cut
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
nor comb his hair, so it is always long and tangled.<note place='foot'>G. M. Dawson, <q>On the Haida
Indians of the Queen Charlotte Islands,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Geological Survey of Canada, Report
of Progress for 1878-79</hi>, p. 123 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note>
Amongst the Alfoers of Celebes the <foreign rend='italic'>Leleen</foreign> or priest
who looks after the rice-fields may not cut his hair
during the time that he exercises his special functions,
that is, from a month before the rice is sown until it is
housed.<note place='foot'>P. N. Wilken, <q>Bijdragen tot de
kennis van de zeden en gewoonten der
Alfoeren in de Minahassa,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche
Zendelingvenootschap</hi>, vii. (1863) p. 126.</note> In Ceram men do not cut their hair: if
married men did so, they would lose their wives; if
young men did so, they would grow weak and enervated.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, p.
137.</note>
In Timorlaut, married men may not cut their
hair for the same reason as in Ceram, but widowers
and men on a journey may do so after offering a fowl
or a pig in sacrifice.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 292 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here men on a journey are
specially permitted to cut their hair; but elsewhere
men travelling abroad have been in the habit of leaving
their hair uncut until their return. The reason for the
latter custom is probably the danger to which, as we
have seen, a traveller is believed to be exposed from
the magic arts of the strangers amongst whom he
sojourns; if they got possession of his shorn hair,
they might work his destruction through it. The
Egyptians on a journey kept their hair uncut till
they returned home.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, i. 18.</note> <q>At Tâif when a man returned
from a journey his first duty was to visit the Rabba
and poll his hair.</q><note place='foot'>W. Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Kinship and
Marriage in Early Arabia</hi>, p. 152 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The custom of keeping the
hair unshorn during a dangerous expedition seems
to have been observed, at least occasionally, by the
Romans.<note place='foot'><p>Valerius Flaccus, <hi rend='italic'>Argonaut</hi>, i. 378
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>:&mdash;
</p>
<p><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Tectus et Eurytion servato colla capillo,<lb/>
Quem pater Aonias reducem tondebit ad aras.</foreign></q>
</p></note> Achilles kept unshorn his yellow hair,
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
because his father had vowed to offer it to the river
Sperchius if ever his son came home from the wars
beyond the sea.<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Iliad</hi>, xxiii. 141 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Again, men who have taken a vow
of vengeance sometimes keep their hair unshorn till
they have fulfilled their vow. Thus of the Marquesans
we are told that <q>occasionally they have their head
entirely shaved, except one lock on the crown, which
is worn loose or put up in a knot. But the latter
mode of wearing the hair is only adopted by them
when they have a solemn vow, as to revenge the death
of some near relation, etc. In such case the lock is
never cut off until they have fulfilled their promise.</q><note place='foot'>D. Porter, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of a Cruise
made to the Pacific Ocean</hi>, ii. 120.</note>
Six thousand Saxons once swore that they would not
cut their hair nor shave their beards until they had
taken vengeance on their enemies.<note place='foot'>Paulus Diaconus, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Langobard.</hi>
iii. 7.</note> On one occasion
a Hawaiian taboo is said to have lasted thirty years
<q>during which the men were not allowed to trim
their beards, etc.</q><note place='foot'>Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian Researches</hi>, iv.
387.</note> While his vow lasted, a Nazarite
might not have his hair cut: <q>All the days of the
vow of his separation there shall no razor come upon
his head.</q><note place='foot'>Numbers vi. 5.</note> Possibly in this case there was a special
objection to touching the tabooed man's head with
iron. The Roman priests, as we have seen, were
shorn with bronze knives. The same feeling probably
gave rise to the European rule that a child's
nails should not be cut during the first year, but
that if it is absolutely necessary to shorten them they
should be bitten off by the mother or nurse.<note place='foot'>J. A. E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch</hi>, etc.
<hi rend='italic'>im Voigtlande</hi>, p. 424; W. Henderson,
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the Northern Counties</hi>, p. 16
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; F. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, i. 258; Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten,
Bräuche und Meinungen des Tiroler
Volkes</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> Nos. 46, 72; J. W. Wolf,
<hi rend='italic'>Beitrage zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, i.
208 (No. 45), 209 (No. 53); Knoop,
<hi rend='italic'>Volkssagen, Erzählungen</hi>, etc. <hi rend='italic'>aus dem
östlichen Hinterpommern</hi>, p. 157 (No.
23); E. Veckenstedt, <hi rend='italic'>Wendische Sagen,
Märchen und abergläubische Gebräuche</hi>,
p. 445; J. Haltrieh, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde der
Siebenbürger Sachsen</hi>, p. 313; E.
Krause, <q>Abergläubische Kuren u.
sonstiger Aberglaube in Berlin,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Zeitschrift
für Ethnologie</hi>, xv. 84.</note> For
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
in all parts of the world a young child is believed
to be especially exposed to supernatural dangers, and
particular precautions are taken to guard it against
them; in other words, the child is under a number of
taboos, of which the rule just mentioned is one.
<q>Among Hindus the usual custom seems to be that
the nails of a first-born child are cut at the age of six
months. With other children a year or two is allowed
to elapse.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. No.
1092.</note> The Slave, Hare, and Dogrib Indians of
North America do not cut the nails of female children
till they are four years of age.<note place='foot'>G. Gibbs, <q>Notes on the Tinneh
or Chepewyan Indians of British and
Russian America,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Annual Report
of the Smithsonian Institution</hi>, 1866,
p. 305; W. Dall, <hi rend='italic'>Alaska and its
Resources</hi>, p. 202. The reason alleged by
the Indians (that if the girls' nails were
cut sooner the girls would be lazy and
unable to embroider in porcupine quill-work)
is probably a late invention, like
the reasons assigned in Europe for the
similar custom (the commonest being
that the child would become a thief).</note> In some parts of
Germany it is thought that if a child's hair is combed
in its first year the child will be unlucky;<note place='foot'>Knoop, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> or that if a
boy's hair is cut before his seventh year he will have
no courage.<note place='foot'>Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, i. 209 (No. 57).</note>
</p>

<p>
But when it is necessary to cut the hair, precautions
are taken to lessen the dangers which are
supposed to attend the operation. Amongst the
Maoris many spells were uttered at hair-cutting; one,
for example, was spoken to consecrate the obsidian
knife with which the hair was cut; another was pronounced
to avert the thunder and lightning which hair-cutting
was believed to cause.<note place='foot'>R. Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>New Zealand and its
Inhabitants</hi>, p. 206 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> <q>He who has had
his hair cut is in the immediate charge of the Atua
(spirit); he is removed from the contact and society of
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
his family and his tribe; he dare not touch his food
himself; it is put into his mouth by another person;
nor can he for some days resume his accustomed
occupations or associate with his fellow men.</q><note place='foot'>Richard A. Cruise, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of a
Ten Months' Residence in New Zealand</hi>,
p. 283 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Cp. Dumont D'Urville,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage autour du Monde et à la recherche
de La Pérouse. Histoire du Voyage</hi>
(Paris, 1832), ii. 533.</note> The
person who cuts the hair is also tabooed; his hands
having been in contact with a sacred head, he may not
touch food with them or engage in any other
employment; he is fed by another person with food
cooked over a sacred fire. He cannot be released from
the taboo before the following day, when he rubs his
hands with potato or fern root which has been cooked
on a sacred fire; and this food having been taken to
the head of the family in the female line and eaten by
her, his hands are freed from the taboo. In some parts
of New Zealand the most sacred day of the year was
that appointed for hair-cutting; the people assembled
in large numbers on that day from all the neighbourhood.<note place='foot'>E. Shortland, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions and
Superstitions of the New Zealanders</hi>,
p. 108 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Taylor, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note>
It is an affair of state when the king of
Cambodia's hair is cut. The priests place on the
barber's fingers certain old rings set with large stones,
which are supposed to contain spirits favourable to the
kings, and during the operation the Brahmans keep
up a noisy music to drive away the evil spirits.<note place='foot'>J. Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume du
Cambodge</hi>, i. 226 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
hair and nails of the Mikado could only be cut while
he was asleep,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>.</note> perhaps because his soul being then
absent from his body, there was less chance of injuring
it with the shears.
</p>

<p>
But even when the hair and nails have been safely
cut, there remains the difficulty of disposing of them,
<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>
for their owner believes himself liable to suffer from
any harm that may befall them. Thus, an Australian
girl, sick of a fever, attributed her illness to
the fact that some months before a young man had
come behind her and cut off a lock of her hair; she
was sure he had buried it and that it was rotting.
<q>Her hair,</q> she said, <q>was rotting somewhere, and
her <foreign rend='italic'>Marm-bu-la</foreign> (kidney fat) was wasting away, and
when her hair had completely rotted, she would die.</q><note place='foot'>Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of
Victoria</hi>, i. 468 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
A Marquesan chief told Lieutenant Gamble that he
was extremely ill, the Happah tribe having stolen a
lock of his hair and buried it in a plantain leaf for
the purpose of taking his life. Lieut. Gamble argued
with him, but in vain; die he must unless the hair
and the plantain leaf were brought back to him; and
to obtain them he had offered the Happahs the
greater part of his property. He complained of excessive
pain in the head, breast and sides.<note place='foot'>D. Porter, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of a Cruise made
to the Pacific Ocean</hi>, ii. 188.</note> When
an Australian blackfellow wishes to get rid of his
wife, he cuts off a lock of her hair in her sleep, ties
it to his spear-thrower, and goes with it to a
neighbouring tribe, where he gives it to a friend.
His friend sticks the spear-thrower up every night
before the camp fire, and when it falls down it is a
sign that his wife is dead.<note place='foot'>J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
p. 36.</note> The way in which the
charm operates was explained to Mr. Howitt by a
Mirajuri man. <q>You see,</q> he said, <q>when a blackfellow
doctor gets hold of something belonging to a
man and roasts it with things, and sings over it, the
fire catches hold of the smell of the man, and that
settles the poor fellow.</q><note place='foot'>A. W. Howitt, <q>On Australian
Medicine-men,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi>
xvi. 27. Cp. E. Palmer, <q>Notes on
some Australian Tribes,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journ.
Anthrop. Inst.</hi> xiii. 293; James
Bonwick, <hi rend='italic'>Daily Life of the Tasmanians</hi>,
p. 178; James Chalmers, <hi rend='italic'>Pioneering in
New Guinea</hi>, p. 187; J. S. Polack,
<hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs of the New
Zealanders</hi>, i. 282; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Völker des östlichen Asien</hi>, iii. 270;
Langsdorff, <hi rend='italic'>Reise um die Welt</hi>, i. 134 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
A. S. Thomson, <hi rend='italic'>The Story of New
Zealand</hi>, i. 79, 116 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ellis, <hi rend='italic'>Polynesian
Researches</hi>, i. 364; Zingerle,
<hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen des
Tiroler Volkes</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> No. 178.</note> In Germany it is a common
<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>
notion that if birds find a person's cut hair, and build
their nests with it, the person will suffer from headache;<note place='foot'>Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>, p. 509; Panzer,
<hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, i.
258; J. A. E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch</hi>
etc. <hi rend='italic'>im Voigtlande</hi>, p. 425; A. Witzschel,
<hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi>,
p. 282; Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> No. 180;
Wolf, <hi rend='italic'>Beiträge zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>,
i. 224 (No. 273).</note>
sometimes it is thought that he will have an
eruption on the head.<note place='foot'>Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> No. 181.</note> Again it is thought that cut
or combed out hair may disturb the weather by
producing rain and hail, thunder and lightning.
We have seen that in New Zealand a spell was
uttered at hair-cutting to avert thunder and lightning.
In the Tirol, witches are supposed to use
cut or combed out hair to make hail-stones or
thunder-storms with.<note place='foot'>Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> Nos. 176, 179.</note> Thlinket Indians have been
known to attribute stormy weather to the fact that
a girl had combed her hair outside of the house.<note place='foot'>A. Krause, <hi rend='italic'>Die Tlinkit-Indianer</hi>.
(Jena, 1885), p. 300.</note>
The Romans seem to have held similar views, for
it was a maxim with them that no one on shipboard
should cut his hair or nails except in a storm,<note place='foot'>Petronius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> 104.</note>
that is, when the mischief was already done. In
West Africa, when the Mani of Chitombe or Jumba
died, the people used to run in crowds to the corpse
and tear out his hair, teeth, and nails, which they kept
as a rain-charm, believing that otherwise no rain
would fall. The Makoko of Anzikos begged the
missionaries to give him half their beards as a
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
rain-charm.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, i. 231 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Ein Besuch in San Salvador</hi>, p. 117.</note> In some Victorian tribes the sorcerer used
to burn human hair in time of drought; it was never
burned at other times for fear of causing a deluge
of rain. Also when the river was low, the sorcerer
would place human hair in the stream to increase
the supply of water.<note place='foot'>W. Stanbridge, <q>On the Aborigines
of Victoria,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Transact. Ethnolog. Soc.
of London</hi>, i. 300.</note>
</p>

<p>
To preserve the cut hair and nails from injury
and from the dangerous uses to which they may be
put by sorcerers, it is necessary to deposit them in
some safe place. Hence the natives of the Maldives
carefully keep the cuttings of their hair and nails
and bury them, with a little water, in the cemeteries;
<q>for they would not for the world tread
upon them nor cast them in the fire, for they say
that they are part of their body and demand burial
as it does; and, indeed, they fold them neatly in
cotton; and most of them like to be shaved at the
gates of temples and mosques.</q><note place='foot'>François Pyrard, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages to the
East Indies, the Maldives, the Moluccas,
and Brazil</hi>. Translated by Albert Gray
(Hakluyt Society, 1887), i. 110 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In New Zealand
the severed hair was deposited on some sacred
spot of ground <q>to protect it from being touched
accidentally or designedly by any one.</q><note place='foot'>Shortland, <hi rend='italic'>Traditions and Superstitions
of the New Zealanders</hi>, p. 110.</note> The shorn
locks of a chief were gathered with much care and
placed in an adjoining cemetery.<note place='foot'>Polack, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs of
the New Zealanders</hi>, i. 38 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Tahitians
buried the cuttings of their hair at the temples.<note place='foot'>James Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>A Missionary Voyage
to the Southern Pacific Ocean</hi>,
p. 355.</note> The
cut hair and nails of the Flamen Dialis were buried
under a lucky tree.<note place='foot'>Aulus Gellius, x. 15, 15.</note> The hair of the Vestal virgins
was hung upon an ancient lotus-tree.<note place='foot'>Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xvi. 235; Festus,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>capillatam vel capillarem arborem</hi>.</note> In Germany
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
the clippings of hair used often to be buried under
an elder-bush.<note place='foot'>Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
§ 464.</note> In Oldenburg cut hair and nails are
wrapt in a cloth which is deposited in a hole in an
elder-tree three days before the new moon; the hole
is then plugged up.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Germanische Mythen</hi>,
p. 630.</note> In the West of Northumberland
it is thought that if the first parings of a child's nails
are buried under an ash-tree, the child will turn out
a fine singer.<note place='foot'>W. Henderson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the
Northern Counties</hi>, p. 17.</note> In Amboina before a child may taste
sago-pap for the first time, the father cuts off a lock
of the child's hair which he buries under a sago
palm.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>De sluik-en kroesharige
rassen tusschen Selebes en Papua</hi>, p. 74.</note> In the Aru Islands, when a child is able to
run alone, a female relation cuts off a lock of its hair
and deposits it on a banana-tree.<note place='foot'>Riedel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 265.</note> In the island of
Roti it is thought that the first hair which a child
gets is not his own and that, if it is not cut off, it
will make him weak and ill. Hence, when the child
is about a month old, his hair is cut off with much
ceremony. As each of the friends who are invited
to the ceremony enters the house he goes up to the
child, cuts off a little of its hair and drops it into a
cocoa-nut shell full of water. Afterwards the father
or another relation takes the hair and packs it into a
little bag made of leaves, which he fastens to the top
of a palm-tree. Then he gives the leaves of the palm
a good shaking, climbs down, and goes home without
speaking to any one.<note place='foot'>G. Heijmering <q>Zeden en gewoonten
op het eiland Rottie,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Neêrland's Indie</hi> (1843), <hi rend='italic'>dl.</hi> ii.
634-637.</note> Indians of the Yukon territory,
Alaska, do not throw away their cut hair and nails,
but tie them up in little bundles and place them in
the crotches of trees or anywhere where they will
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
not be disturbed by animals. For <q>they have a
superstition that disease will follow the disturbance
of such remains by animals.</q><note place='foot'>W. Dall, <hi rend='italic'>Alaska and its Resources</hi>,
p. 54; F. Whymper, <q>The Natives of the
Youkon River,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Transact. Ethnolog.
Soc. of London</hi>, vii. 174.</note> The clipped hair
and nails are often buried in any secret place, not
necessarily in a temple or cemetery or under a tree,
as in the cases already mentioned. In Swabia it is
said that cut hair should be buried in a place where
neither sun nor moon shines, therefore in the ground,
under a stone, etc.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>, p. 509.</note> In Danzig it is buried in a bag
under the threshold.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Germanische Mythen</hi>,
p. 630.</note> In Ugi, one of the Solomon
Islands, men bury their hair lest it should fall into
the hands of an enemy who would make magic with
it and so bring sickness or calamity on them.<note place='foot'>H. B. Guppy, <hi rend='italic'>The Solomon Islands
and their Natives</hi>, p. 54.</note> The
Zend Avesta directs that the clippings of hair and
the parings of nails shall be placed in separate holes,
and that three, six, or nine furrows shall be drawn
round each hole with a metal knife.<note place='foot'>Fargaard, xvii.</note> In the Grihya-Sûtras
it is provided that the hair cut from a child's
head at the end of the first, third, fifth, or seventh
year shall be buried in the earth at a place covered
with grass or in the neighbourhood of water.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Grihya-Sûtras</hi>, translated by H.
Oldenberg (Oxford, 1886), vol. i. p. 57.</note> The
Madi or Moru tribe of Central Africa bury the
parings of their nails in the ground.<note place='foot'>R. W. Felkin, <q>Notes on the
Madi or Moru tribe of Central Africa,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh</hi>, xii. (1882-84) p. 332.</note> The Kafirs
carry still further this dread of allowing any portion
of themselves to fall into the hands of an enemy;
for not only do they bury their cut hair and nails
in a sacred place, but when one of them cleans the
head of another he preserves the insects which he
<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>
finds, <q>carefully delivering them to the person to
whom they originally appertained, supposing, according
to their theory, that as they derived their support
from the blood of the man from whom they were
taken, should they be killed by another the blood
of his neighbour would be in his possession, thus
placing in his hands the power of some superhuman
influence.</q><note place='foot'>A. Steedman, <hi rend='italic'>Wanderings and
Adventures in the Interior of Southern
Africa</hi> (London, 1835), i. 266.</note> Amongst the Wanyoro of Central Africa
all cuttings of the hair and nails are carefully stored
under the bed and afterwards strewed about among
the tall grass.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Emin Pasha in Central Africa,
being a Collection of his Letters and
Journals</hi> (London, 1888), p. 74.</note> In North Guinea they are carefully
hidden (it is not said where) <q>in order that they may
not be used as a fetish for the destruction of him to
whom they belong.</q><note place='foot'>J. L. Wilson, <hi rend='italic'>West Afrika</hi>, p.
159 (German trans.)</note> In Bolang Mongondo (Celebes)
the first hair cut from a child's head is kept in a
young cocoa-nut, which is commonly hung on the front
of the house, under the roof.<note place='foot'>N. P. Wilken en J. A. Schwarz,
<q>Allerlei over het land en volk van
Bolaang Mongondou,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Mededeelingen
van wege het Nederlandsche Zendelinggenootschap</hi>,
xi. (1867) p. 322.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes the severed hair and nails are preserved,
not to prevent them from falling into the
hands of a magician, but that the owner may have
them at the resurrection of the body, to which some
races look forward. Thus the Incas of Peru <q>took
extreme care to preserve the nail-parings and the
hairs that were shorn off or torn out with a comb;
placing them in holes or niches in the walls, and if
they fell out, any other Indian that saw them picked
them up and put them in their places again. I very
often asked different Indians, at various times, why
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
they did this, in order to see what they would say,
and they all replied in the same words, saying, <q>Know
that all persons who are born must return to life</q>
(they have no word to express resuscitation), <q>and
the souls must rise out of their tombs with all that
belonged to their bodies. We, therefore, in order
that we may not have to search for our hair and
nails at a time when there will be much hurry and
confusion, place them in one place, that they may
be brought together more conveniently, and, whenever
it is possible, we are also careful to spit in one
place.</q></q><note place='foot'>Garcilasso de la Vega, <hi rend='italic'>First part
of the Royal Commentaries of the Yncas</hi>,
bk. ii. ch. 7 (vol. i. p. 127, Markham's
translation).</note> In Chile this custom of stuffing the shorn
hair into holes in the wall is still observed, it being
thought the height of imprudence to throw the hair
away.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Mélusine</hi>, 1878, c. 583 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Similarly the Turks never throw away the
parings of their nails, but carefully keep them in
cracks of the walls or of the boards, in the belief
that they will be needed at the resurrection.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>The People of Turkey</hi>, by a Consul's
daughter and wife, ii. 250.</note> Some
of the Esthonians keep the parings of their finger
and toe nails in their bosom, in order to have them
at hand when they are asked for them at the day
of judgment.<note place='foot'>Boecler-Kreutzwald, <hi rend='italic'>Der Ehsten
abergläubische Gebräuche, Weisen und
Gewohnheiten</hi>, p. 139; F. J. Wiedemann,
<hi rend='italic'>Aus dem innern und äussern
Leben der Ehsten</hi>, p. 491.</note> The Fors of Central Africa object to
cut any one else's nails, for should the part cut off
be lost and not delivered into its owner's hands, it
will have to be made up to him somehow or other
after death. The parings are buried in the ground.<note place='foot'>R. W. Felkin, <q>Notes on the
For tribe of Central Africa,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Proceedings
of the Royal Society of Edinburgh</hi>,
xiii. (1884-86) p. 230.</note>
To spit upon the hair before throwing it away is
thought in some parts of Europe sufficient to prevent
<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>
its being used by witches.<note place='foot'>Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten, Bräuche und Meinungen
des Tiroler Volkes</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> Nos. 176,
580; <hi rend='italic'>Mélusine</hi>, 1878, c. 79.</note> Spitting as a protective
charm is well known.
</p>

<p>
Some people burn their loose hair to save it from
falling into the power of sorcerers. This is done by
the Patagonians and some of the Victorian tribes.<note place='foot'>Musters, <q>On the Races of Patagonia,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi> i.
197; J. Dawson, <hi rend='italic'>Australian Aborigines</hi>,
p. 36.</note>
The Makololo of South Africa either burn it or bury
it secretly,<note place='foot'>David Livingstone, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of
Expedition to the Zambesi</hi>, p. 46 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and the same alternative is sometimes
adopted by the Tirolese.<note place='foot'>Zingerle, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> Nos. 177, 179,
180.</note> Cut and combed out hair is
burned in Pomerania and sometimes at Liége.<note place='foot'>M. Jahn, <hi rend='italic'>Hexenwesen und Zauberei
in Pommern</hi>, p. 15; <hi rend='italic'>Mélusine</hi>, 1878, c.
79.</note> In
Norway the parings of nails are either burned or buried,
lest the elves or the Finns should find them and make
them into bullets wherewith to shoot the cattle.<note place='foot'>E. H. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Indogermanische
Mythen</hi>, ii. <hi rend='italic'>Achilleis</hi> (Berlin, 1887), p.
523.</note>
This destruction of the hair or nails plainly involves
an inconsistency of thought. The object of the destruction
is avowedly to prevent these severed portions
of the body from being used by sorcerers. But the
possibility of their being so used depends upon the
supposed sympathetic connection between them and
the man from whom they were severed. And if this
sympathetic connection still exists, clearly these severed
portions cannot be destroyed without injury to the
man.
</p>

<p>
Before leaving this subject, on which I have perhaps
dwelt too long, it may be well to call attention to
the motive assigned for cutting a young child's hair in
Roti.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>.</note> In that island the first hair is regarded as a
danger to the child, and its removal is intended to avert
the danger. The reason of this may be that as a
<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>
young child is almost universally supposed to be in a
tabooed or dangerous state, it is necessary, in removing
the taboo, to destroy the separable parts of the child's
body on the ground that they are infected, so to say,
by the virus of the taboo and as such are dangerous.
The cutting of the child's hair would thus be exactly
parallel to the destruction of the vessels which have
been used by a tabooed person.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> This view is borne
out by a practice, observed by some Australians, of
burning off part of a woman's hair after childbirth as
well as burning every vessel which has been used by
her during her seclusion.<note place='foot'>W. Ridley, <q>Report on Australian
Languages and Traditions,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journ.
Anthrop. Inst.</hi> ii. 268.</note> Here the burning of the
woman's hair seems plainly intended to serve the same
purpose as the burning of the vessels used by her; and
as the vessels are burned because they are believed to be
tainted with a dangerous infection, so, we must suppose,
is also the hair. We can, therefore, understand the
importance attached by many peoples to the first cutting
of a child's hair and the elaborate ceremonies by
which the operation is accompanied.<note place='foot'>See G. A. Wilken, <hi rend='italic'>Ueber das Haaropfer
und einige andere Trauergebräuche
bei den Völkern Indonesiens</hi>, p.
94 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; H. Ploss, Das Kind in Branch
und Sitte der Völker<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 289 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Again, we can
understand why a man should poll his head after a
journey.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>.</note> For we have seen that a traveller is often
believed to contract a dangerous infection from
strangers and that, therefore, on his return home he is
obliged to submit to various purificatory ceremonies
before he is allowed to mingle freely with his own
people.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On my hypothesis the polling of the hair is
simply one of these purificatory or disinfectant ceremonies.
The cutting of the hair after a vow may
have the same meaning. It is a way of ridding the
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
man of what has been infected by the dangerous state
of taboo, sanctity, or uncleanness (for all these are
only different expressions for the same primitive conception)
under which he laboured during the continuance
of the vow. Similarly at some Hindu places
of pilgrimage on the banks of rivers men who have
committed great crimes or are troubled by uneasy
consciences have every hair shaved off by professional
barbers before they plunge into the sacred stream,
from which <q>they emerge new creatures, with all the
accumulated guilt of a long life effaced.</q><note place='foot'>Monier Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Religious Thought
and Life in India</hi>, p. 375.</note>
</p>

<p>
As might have been expected, the superstitions of
the savage cluster thick about the subject of food; and
he abstains from eating many animals and plants,
wholesome enough in themselves, but which for one
reason or another he considers would prove dangerous
or fatal to the eater. Examples of such abstinence
are too familiar and far too numerous to quote. But
if the ordinary man is thus deterred by superstitious
fear from partaking of various foods, the restraints of
this kind which are laid upon sacred or tabooed persons,
such as kings and priests, are still more numerous
and stringent. We have already seen that the Flamen
Dialis was forbidden to eat or even name several plants
and animals, and that the flesh diet of the Egyptian
kings was restricted to veal and goose.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>.</note> The <foreign rend='italic'>Gangas</foreign>
or fetish priests of the Loango Coast are forbidden to
eat or even see a variety of animals and fish, in consequence
of which their flesh diet is extremely limited;
often they live only on herbs and roots, though they
may drink fresh blood.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutsche Expedition
an der Loango-Küste</hi>, ii. 170. The
blood may be drunk by them as a
medium of inspiration. See above,
p. <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The heir to the throne of
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
Loango is forbidden from infancy to eat pork; from
early childhood he is interdicted the use of the <foreign rend='italic'>cola</foreign>
fruit in company; at puberty he is taught by a
priest not to partake of fowls except such as he has
himself killed and cooked; and so the number of
taboos goes on increasing with his years.<note place='foot'>Dapper, <hi rend='italic'>Description de l'Afrique</hi>,
p. 336.</note> In Fernando
Po the king after installation is forbidden to eat
<foreign rend='italic'>cocco</foreign> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>arum acaule</foreign>), deer, and porcupine, which are the
ordinary foods of the people.<note place='foot'>T. J. Hutchinson, <hi rend='italic'>Impressions of
Western Africa</hi> (London, 1858), p. 198.</note> Amongst the Murrams
of Manipur (a district of Eastern India, on the border
of Burma), <q>there are many prohibitions in regard to
the food, both animal and vegetable, which the chief
should eat, and the Murrams say the chief's post must
be a very uncomfortable one.</q><note place='foot'>G. Watt (quoting Col. W. J.
M'Culloch), <q>The Aboriginal Tribes of
Manipur,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journ. Anthrop. Inst.</hi>
xvi. 360.</note> To explain the ultimate
reason why any particular food is prohibited to a
whole tribe or to certain of its members would commonly
require a far more intimate knowledge of the
history and beliefs of the tribe than we possess. The
general motive of such prohibitions is doubtless the
same which underlies the whole taboo system, namely,
the conservation of the tribe and the individual.
</p>

<p>
It would be easy to extend the list of royal and
priestly taboos, but the above may suffice as specimens.
To conclude this part of our subject it only remains to
state summarily the general conclusions to which our
inquiries have thus far conducted us. We have seen
that in savage or barbarous society there are often
found men to whom the superstition of their fellows
ascribes a controlling influence over the general course
of nature. Such men are accordingly adored and
treated as gods. Whether these human divinities
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
also hold temporal sway over the lives and fortunes
of their fellows, or whether their functions are purely
spiritual and supernatural, in other words, whether they
are kings as well as gods or only the latter, is a distinction
which hardly concerns us here. Their supposed
divinity is the essential fact with which we have
to deal. In virtue of it they are a pledge and guarantee
to their worshippers of the continuance and
orderly succession of those physical phenomena upon
which mankind depends for subsistence. Naturally,
therefore, the life and health of such a god-man are
matters of anxious concern to the people whose welfare
and even existence are bound up with his; naturally
he is constrained by them to conform to such rules as
the wit of early man has devised for averting the ills
to which flesh is heir, including the last ill, death.
These rules, as an examination of them has shown, are
nothing but the maxims with which, on the primitive
view, every man of common prudence must comply
if he would live long in the land. But while in the
case of ordinary men the observance of the rules is
left to the choice of the individual, in the case of the
god-man it is enforced under penalty of dismissal from
his high station, or even of death. For his worshippers
have far too great a stake in his life to allow him
to play fast and loose with it. Therefore all the
quaint superstitions, the old-world maxims, the venerable
saws which the ingenuity of savage philosophers
elaborated long ago, and which old women at chimney
corners still impart as treasures of great price to their
descendants gathered round the cottage fire on winter
evenings&mdash;all these antique fancies clustered, all these
cobwebs of the brain were spun about the path of the
old king, the human god, who, immeshed in them like
<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>
a fly in the toils of a spider, could hardly stir a limb
for the threads of custom, <q>light as air but strong as
links of iron,</q> that crossing and recrossing each other
in an endless maze bound him fast within a network of
observances from which death or deposition alone
could release him.
</p>

<p>
To students of the past the life of the old kings
and priests thus teems with instruction. In it was
summed up all that passed for wisdom when the
world was young. It was the perfect pattern after
which every man strove to shape his life; a faultless
model constructed with rigorous accuracy upon the
lines laid down by a barbarous philosophy. Crude and
false as that philosophy may seem to us, it would be
unjust to deny it the merit of logical consistency.
Starting from a conception of the vital principle as a
tiny being or soul existing in, but distinct and separable
from, the living being, it deduces for the practical
guidance of life a system of rules which in general
hangs well together and forms a fairly complete and
harmonious whole. The flaw&mdash;and it is a fatal one&mdash;of
the system lies not in its reasoning, but in its premises;
in its conception of the nature of life, not in
any irrelevancy of the conclusions which it draws from
that conception. But to stigmatise these premises as
ridiculous because we can easily detect their falseness,
would be ungrateful as well as unphilosophical. We
stand upon the foundation reared by the generations
that have gone before, and we can but dimly realise
the painful and prolonged efforts which it has cost
humanity to struggle up to the point, no very exalted
one after all, which we have reached. Our gratitude
is due to the nameless and forgotten toilers, whose
patient thought and active exertions have largely made
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
us what we are. The amount of new knowledge
which one age, certainly which one man, can add to
the common store is small, and it argues stupidity or
dishonesty, besides ingratitude, to ignore the heap
while vaunting the few grains which it may have been
our privilege to add to it. There is indeed little
danger at present of undervaluing the contributions
which modern times and even classical antiquity have
made to the general advancement of our race. But
when we pass these limits, the case is different.
Contempt and ridicule or abhorrence and denunciation
are too often the only recognition vouchsafed to the
savage and his ways. Yet of the benefactors whom
we are bound thankfully to commemorate, many, perhaps
most, were savages. For when all is said and
done our resemblances to the savage are still far more
numerous than our differences from him; and what we
have in common with him, and deliberately retain as
true and useful, we owe to our savage forefathers who
slowly acquired by experience and transmitted to us by
inheritance those seemingly fundamental ideas which
we are apt to regard as original and intuitive. We
are like heirs to a fortune which has been handed
down for so many ages that the memory of those who
built it up is lost, and its possessors for the time being
regard it as having been an original and unalterable
possession of their race since the beginning of the
world. But reflection and inquiry should satisfy us
that to our predecessors we are indebted for much of
what we thought most our own, and that their errors
were not wilful extravagances or the ravings of insanity,
but simply hypotheses, justifiable as such at the time
when they were propounded, but which a fuller experience
has proved to be inadequate. It is only by the
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
successive testing of hypotheses and rejection of the
false that truth is at last elicited. After all, what we
call truth is only the hypothesis which is found to
work best. Therefore in reviewing the opinions and
practices of ruder ages and races we shall do well to
look with leniency upon their errors as inevitable slips
made in the search for truth, and to give them the
benefit of that indulgence which we may one day stand
in need of ourselves: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>cum excusatione itaque veteres
audiendi sunt</foreign>.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Killing The God.</head>

<quote rend='display'>
<q>Sed adhuc supersunt aliae superstitiones, quarum secreta pandenda
sunt, ... ut et in istis profanis religionibus sciatis mortes esse
hominum consecratas.</q>&mdash;<hi rend='smallcaps'>Firmicus Maternus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De errore profanarum
religionum</hi>, c. 6.
</quote>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='1. Killing the divine king.'/>
<head>§ 1.&mdash;Killing the divine king.</head>

<p>
Lacking the idea of eternal duration primitive man
naturally supposes the gods to be mortal like himself.
The Greenlanders believed that a wind could kill their
most powerful god, and that he would certainly die
if he touched a dog. When they heard of the Christian
God, they kept asking if he <emph>never</emph> died, and being
informed that he did not, they were much surprised
and said that he must be a very great god indeed.<note place='foot'>Meiners, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte der Religionen</hi>,
i. 48.</note>
In answer to the inquiries of Colonel Dodge, a North
American Indian stated that the world was made by
the Great Spirit. Being asked which Great Spirit he
meant, the good one or the bad one, <q>Oh, neither of
<emph>them</emph></q> replied he, <q>the Great Spirit that made the
world is dead long ago. He could not possibly have
lived as long as this.</q><note place='foot'>R. I. Dodge, <hi rend='italic'>Our Wild Indians</hi>,
p. 112.</note> A tribe in the Philippine
Islands told the Spanish conquerors that the grave of
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
the Creator was upon the top of Mount Cabunian.<note place='foot'>Blumentritt, <q>Der Ahnencultus und
die relig. Anschauungen der Malaien
des Philippinen-Archipels,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Mittheilungen
d. Wiener Geogr. Gesellschaft</hi>,
1882, p. 198.</note>
Heitsi-eibib, a god or divine hero of the Hottentots,
died several times and came to life again. His graves
are generally to be met with in narrow passes between
mountains.<note place='foot'>Theophilus Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Tsuni-Goam,
the Supreme Being of the Khoi-Khoi</hi>,
pp. 56, 69.</note> The grave of Zeus, the great god of
Greece, was shown to visitors in Crete as late as about
the beginning of our era.<note place='foot'>Diodorus, iii. 61; Pomponius
Mela, ii. 7, 112; Minucius Felix,
<hi rend='italic'>Octavius</hi>, 21.</note> The body of Dionysus was
buried at Delphi beside the golden statue of Apollo,
and his tomb bore the inscription, <q>Here lies Dionysus
dead, the son of Semele.</q><note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35;
Philochorus, <hi rend='italic'>Fragm.</hi> 22, in Müller's
<hi rend='italic'>Fragm. Hist. Graec.</hi> i. p. 387.</note> According to one account,
Apollo himself was buried at Delphi; for Pythagoras
is said to have carved an inscription on his tomb,
setting forth how the god had been killed by the
python and buried under the tripod.<note place='foot'>Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>Vit. Pythag.</hi> 16.</note> Cronus was
buried in Sicily,<note place='foot'>Philochorus, <hi rend='italic'>Fr.</hi> 184, in <hi rend='italic'>Fragm.
Hist. Graec.</hi> ii. p. 414.</note> and the graves of Hermes, Aphrodite,
and Ares were shown in Hermopolis, Cyprus, and
Thrace.<note place='foot'>Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, p. 574 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
If the great invisible gods are thus supposed to
die, it is not to be expected that a god who dwells in
the flesh and blood of a man should escape the same
fate. Now primitive peoples, as we have seen, sometimes
believe that their safety and even that of the
world is bound up with the life of one of these god-men
or human incarnations of the divinity. Naturally,
therefore, they take the utmost care of his life, out of
a regard for their own. But no amount of care and
precaution will prevent the man-god from growing old
and feeble and at last dying. His worshippers have
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
to lay their account with this sad necessity and to
meet it as best they can. The danger is a formidable
one; for if the course of nature is dependent on the
man-god's life, what catastrophes may not be expected
from the gradual enfeeblement of his powers and their
final extinction in death? There is only one way
of averting these dangers. The man-god must be
killed as soon as he shows symptoms that his powers
are beginning to fail, and his soul must be transferred
to a vigorous successor before it has been seriously
impaired by the threatened decay. The advantages
of thus putting the man-god to death instead of allowing
him to die of old age and disease are, to the
savage, obvious enough. For if the man-god dies
what we call a natural death, it means, according
to the savage, that his soul has either voluntarily
departed from his body and refuses to return, or more
commonly that it has been extracted or at least detained
in its wanderings by a demon or sorcerer.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In any of
these cases the soul of the man-god is lost to his
worshippers; and with it their prosperity is gone and
their very existence endangered. Even if they could
arrange to catch the soul of the dying god as it left his
lips or his nostrils and so transfer it to a successor, this
would not effect their purpose; for, thus dying of
disease, his soul would necessarily leave his body in
the last stage of weakness and exhaustion, and as such
it would continue to drag out a feeble existence in the
body to which it might be transferred. Whereas by
killing him his worshippers could, in the first place,
make sure of catching his soul as it escaped and
transferring it to a suitable successor; and, in the
second place, by killing him before his natural force
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
was abated, they would secure that the world should
not fall into decay with the decay of the man-god.
Every purpose, therefore, was answered, and all dangers
averted by thus killing the man-god and transferring
his soul, while yet at its prime, to a vigorous successor.
</p>

<p>
Some of the reasons for preferring a violent death
to the slow death of old age or disease are obviously
as applicable to common men as to the man-god. Thus
the Mangaians think that <q>the spirits of those who die
a natural death are excessively feeble and weak, as
their bodies were at dissolution; whereas the spirits of
those who are slain in battle are strong and vigorous,
their bodies not having been reduced by disease.</q><note place='foot'>Gill, <hi rend='italic'>Myths and Songs of the South
Pacific</hi>, p. 163.</note>
Hence, men sometimes prefer to kill themselves or to
be killed before they grow feeble, in order that in the
future life their souls may start fresh and vigorous as
they left their bodies, instead of decrepit and worn out
with age and disease. Thus in Fiji, <q>self-immolation
is by no means rare, and they believe that as they
leave this life, so they will remain ever after. This
forms a powerful motive to escape from decrepitude,
or from a crippled condition, by a voluntary death.</q><note place='foot'>Ch. Wilkes, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the U. S.
Exploring Expedition</hi> (London, 1845),
iii. 96.</note>
Or, as another observer of the Fijians puts it more
fully, <q>the custom of voluntary suicide on the part of
the old men, which is among their most extraordinary
usages, is also connected with their superstitions respecting
a future life. They believe that persons enter
upon the delights of their elysium with the same
faculties, mental and physical, that they possess at
the hour of death, in short, that the spiritual life
commences where the corporeal existence terminates.
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
With these views, it is natural that they should desire
to pass through this change before their mental and
bodily powers are so enfeebled by age as to deprive
them of their capacity for enjoyment. To this motive
must be added the contempt which attaches to physical
weakness among a nation of warriors, and the wrongs
and insults which await those who are no longer able
to protect themselves. When therefore a man finds
his strength declining with the advance of age, and
feels that he will soon be unequal to discharge the
duties of this life, and to partake in the pleasures of
that which is to come, he calls together his relations,
and tells them that he is now worn out and useless,
that he sees they are all ashamed of him, and
that he has determined to be buried.</q> So on a day
appointed they meet and bury him alive.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>U. S. Exploring Expedition, Ethnology
and Philology</hi>, by H. Hale
(Philadelphia, 1846), p. 65. Cp. Th.
Williams, <hi rend='italic'>Fiji and the Fijians</hi>, i. 183;
J. E. Erskine, <hi rend='italic'>Journal of a Cruise among
the Islands of the Western Pacific</hi>, p. 248.</note> In Vaté
(New Hebrides) the aged were buried alive at their
own request. It was considered a disgrace to the
family of an old chief if he was not buried alive.<note place='foot'>Turner, <hi rend='italic'>Samoa</hi>, p. 335.</note> Of
the Kamants, a Jewish tribe in Abyssinia, it is reported
that <q>they never let a person die a natural death, but
if any of their relatives is nearly expiring, the priest of
the village is called to cut his throat; if this be omitted,
they believe that the departed soul has not entered the
mansions of the blessed.</q><note place='foot'>Martin Flad, <hi rend='italic'>A Short Description of
the Falasha and Kamants in Abyssinia</hi>,
p. 19.</note>
</p>

<p>
But it is with the death of the god-man&mdash;the divine
king or priest&mdash;that we are here especially concerned.
The people of Congo believed, as we have seen, that
if their pontiff the Chitomé were to die a natural death,
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
the world would perish, and the earth, which he alone
sustained by his power and merit, would immediately
be annihilated. Accordingly when he fell ill and
seemed likely to die, the man who was destined to
be his successor entered the pontiff's house with a
rope or a club and strangled or clubbed him to death.<note place='foot'>J. B. Labat, <hi rend='italic'>Relation historique de
l'Ethiopie Occidentale</hi>, i. 260 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W.
Winwood Reade, <hi rend='italic'>Savage Africa</hi>, p. 362.</note>
The Ethiopian kings of Meroe were worshipped as
gods; but whenever the priests chose, they sent a
messenger to the king, ordering him to die, and alleging
an oracle of the gods as their authority for the
command. This command the kings always obeyed
down to the reign of Ergamenes, a contemporary of
Ptolemy II, King of Egypt. Having received a
Greek education which emancipated him from the superstitions
of his countrymen, Ergamenes ventured to disregard
the command of the priests, and, entering the
Golden Temple with a body of soldiers, put the priests
to the sword.<note place='foot'>Diodorus Siculus, iii. 6; Strabo,
xvii. 2, 3.</note> In the kingdom of Unyoro in Central
Africa, custom still requires that as soon as the king falls
seriously ill or begins to break up from age, he shall be
killed by his own wives; for, according to an old prophecy,
the throne will pass away from the dynasty in
the event of the king dying a natural death.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Emin Pasha in Central Africa,
being a Collection of his Letters and
Journals</hi> (London, 1888), p. 91.</note> When
the king of Kibanga, on the Upper Congo, seems
near his end, the sorcerers put a rope round his neck,
which they draw gradually tighter till he dies.<note place='foot'>P. Guillemé, <q>Credenze religiose
dei Negri di Kibanga nell' Alto Congo,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Archivio per lo studio delle tradizioni
popolari</hi>, vii. (1888) p. 231.</note> It
seems to have been a Zulu custom to put the king to
death as soon as he began to have wrinkles or gray
hairs. At least this seems implied in the following
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
passage, written by one who resided for some time at
the court of the notorious Zulu tyrant Chaka, in the
early part of this century: <q>The extraordinary violence
of the king's rage with me was mainly occasioned by
that absurd nostrum, the hair oil, with the notion of
which Mr. Farewell had impressed him as being a
specific for removing all indications of age. From the
first moment of his having heard that such a preparation
was attainable, he evinced a solicitude to procure
it, and on every occasion never forgot to remind us of
his anxiety respecting it; more especially on our
departure on the mission his injunctions were
particularly directed to this object. It will be seen
that it is one of the barbarous customs of the Zoolas in
their choice or election of their kings that he must
neither have wrinkles nor gray hairs, as they are both
distinguishing marks of disqualification for becoming
a monarch of a warlike people. It is also equally
indispensable that their king should never exhibit
those proofs of having become unfit and incompetent
to reign; it is therefore important that they should conceal
these indications so long as they possibly can.
Chaka had become greatly apprehensive of the approach
of gray hairs; which would at once be the signal for him
to prepare to make his exit from this sublunary world,
it being always followed by the death of the monarch.</q><note place='foot'>Nathaniel Isaacs, <hi rend='italic'>Travels and Adventures in Eastern Africa</hi>, i. p. 295 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, cp.
pp. 232, 290 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The custom of putting kings to death as soon as they
suffered from any personal defect prevailed two centuries
ago in the Kafir kingdoms of Sofala, to the north of the
present Zululand. These kings of Sofala, as we have
seen,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> were regarded as gods by their people, being entreated
to give rain or sunshine, according as each might
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
be wanted. Nevertheless a slight bodily blemish, such
as the loss of a tooth, was considered a sufficient cause
for putting one of these god-men to death, as we learn
from the following passage of an old historian. <q>Contiguous
to the domains of the Quiteva [the king of the
country bordering on the river Sofala], are those of
another prince called Sedanda. This prince becoming
afflicted with leprosy, resolved on following implicitly
the laws of the country, and poisoning himself, conceiving
his malady to be incurable, or at least that it
would render him so loathsome in the eyes of his
people that they would with difficulty recognise him.
In consequence he nominated his successor, holding as
his opinion that sovereigns who should serve in all
things as an example to their people ought to have no
defect whatever, even in their persons; that when any
defects may chance to befall them they cease to be
worthy of life and of governing their dominions; and
preferring death in compliance with this law to life,
with the reproach of having been its violator. But
this law was not observed with equal scrupulosity by
one of the Quitevas, who, having lost a tooth and
feeling no disposition to follow the practice of his predecessors,
published to the people that he had lost a
front tooth, in order that when they might behold, they
yet might be able to recognise him; declaring at the
same time that he was resolved on living and reigning
as long as he could, esteeming his existence requisite
for the welfare of his subjects. He at the same time
loudly condemned the practice of his predecessors, whom
he taxed with imprudence, nay, even with madness, for
having condemned themselves to death for casual
accidents to their persons, confessing plainly that it
would be with much regret, even when the course of
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
nature should bring him to his end, that he should
submit to die. He observed, moreover, that no reasonable
being, much less a monarch, ought to anticipate
the scythe of time; and, abrogating this mortal law,
he ordained that all his successors, if sane, should follow
the precedent he gave, and the new law established
by him.</q><note place='foot'>Dos Santos, <q>History of Eastern
Ethiopia</q> (published at Paris in 1684),
in Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>,
xvi. 684.</note>
</p>

<p>
This King of Sofala was, therefore, a bold reformer
like Ergamenes, King of Ethiopia. We may conjecture
that the ground for putting the Ethiopian
kings to death was, as in the case of the Zulu and
Sofala kings, the appearance on their person of any
bodily defect or sign of decay; and that the oracle
which the priests alleged as the authority for the royal
execution was to the effect that great calamities would
result from the reign of a king who had any blemish
on his body; just as an oracle warned Sparta against
a <q>lame reign,</q> that is, the reign of a lame king.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Agesilaus</hi>, 3.</note>
This conjecture is confirmed by the fact that the kings
of Ethiopia were chosen for their size, strength, and
beauty long before the custom of killing them was
abolished.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, iii. 20; Aristotle, <hi rend='italic'>Politics</hi>,
iv. 4, 4; Athenaeus, xiii. p. 566.
According to Nicolaus Damascenus
(<hi rend='italic'>Fr.</hi> 142, in <hi rend='italic'>Fragm. Historic. Graecor.</hi>
ed. C. Müller, iii. p. 463), the handsomest
and bravest man was only raised
to the throne when the king had no
heirs, the heirs being the sons of his
sisters. But this limitation is not
mentioned by the other authorities.
Among the Gordioi the fattest man
was chosen king; among the Syrakoi,
the tallest, or the man with the longest
head. Zenobius, v. 25.</note> To this day the Sultan of Wadâi must
have no obvious bodily defect, and a king of Angoy
cannot be crowned if he has a single blemish, such as
a broken or filed tooth or the scar of an old wound.<note place='foot'>G. Nachtigal, <hi rend='italic'>Saharâ und Sûdân</hi>
(Leipzig, 1889), iii. 225; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die
deutsche Expedition an der Loango-Küste</hi>,
i. 220.</note>
It is only natural, therefore, to suppose, especially
<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>
with the other African examples before us, that any
bodily defect or symptom of old age appearing on the
person of the Ethiopian monarch was the signal for
his execution. At a later time it is recorded that if
the King of Ethiopia became maimed in any part of his
body all his courtiers had to suffer the same mutilation.<note place='foot'>Strabo, xvii. 2, 3; Diodorus, iii. 7.</note>
But this rule may perhaps have been instituted
at the time when the custom of killing the king for
any personal defect was abolished; instead of compelling
the king to die because, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, he had lost a tooth,
all his subjects would be obliged to lose a tooth,
and thus the invidious superiority of the subjects
over the king would be cancelled. A rule of this
sort is still observed in the same region at the
court of the Sultans of Darfur. When the Sultan
coughs, every one makes the sound <foreign rend='italic'>ts ts</foreign> by striking
the tongue against the root of the upper teeth; when
he sneezes, the whole assembly utters a sound like the
cry of the jeko; when he falls off his horse, all his
followers must fall off likewise; if any one of them
remains in the saddle, no matter how high his
rank, he is laid on the ground and beaten.<note place='foot'>Mohammed Ebn-Omar El-Tounsy,
<hi rend='italic'>Voyage au Darfour</hi> (Paris, 1845), p.
162 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Travels of an Arab Merchant
in Soudan</hi>, abridged from the French
by Bayle St. John (London, 1854), p.
78; <hi rend='italic'>Bulletin de la Société de Géographie</hi>
(Paris) IVme Série, iv. (1852) p. 539 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At the
court of the King of Uganda in Central Africa, when
the king laughs, every one laughs; when he sneezes,
every one sneezes; when he has a cold, every one
pretends to have a cold; when he has his hair cut, so
has every one.<note place='foot'>R. W. Felkin, <q>Notes on the
Waganda Tribe of Central Africa,</q> in
<hi rend='italic'>Proceedings of the Royal Society of
Edinburgh</hi>, xiii. (1884-1886) p. 711.</note> At the court of Boni in Celebes it is
a rule that whatever the king does all the courtiers
must do. If he stands, they stand; if he sits, they sit;
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
if he falls off his horse, they fall off their horses; if
he bathes, they bathe, and passers-by must go into the
water in the dress, good or bad, which they happen to
have on.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Narrative of events in Borneo and
Celebes, from the Journals of James
Brooke, Esq., Rajah of Sarawak.</hi> By
Captain R. Mundy, i. 134.</note> But to return to the death of the divine
man. The old Prussians acknowledged as their supreme
lord a ruler who governed them in the name of the
gods, and was known as God's Mouth (<foreign rend='italic'>Kirwaido</foreign>).
When he felt himself weak and ill, if he wished to leave
a good name behind him, he had a great heap made of
thorn-bushes and straw, on which he mounted and delivered
a long sermon to the people, exhorting them to
serve the gods and promising to go to the gods and
speak for the people. Then he took some of the perpetual
fire which burned in front of the holy oak-tree,
and lighting the pile with it burned himself to death.<note place='foot'>Simon Grunau, <hi rend='italic'>Preussische Chronik</hi>,
herausgegeben von Dr. M. Perlbach
(Leipzig, 1876), i. p. 97.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the cases hitherto described, the divine king
or priest is suffered by his people to retain office
until some outward defect, some visible symptom of
failing health or advancing age warns them that he
is no longer equal to the discharge of his divine
duties; but not until such symptoms have made
their appearance is he put to death. Some peoples,
however, appear to have thought it unsafe to wait for
even the slightest symptom of decay and have preferred
to kill the king while he was still in the full
vigour of life. Accordingly, they have fixed a term
beyond which he might not reign, and at the close of
which he must die, the term fixed upon being short
enough to exclude the probability of his degenerating
physically in the interval. In some parts of
Southern India the period fixed was twelve years.
<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>
Thus, according to an old traveller, in the province of
Quilacare <q>There is a Gentile house of prayer, in which
there is an idol which they hold in great account, and
every twelve years they celebrate a great feast to it,
whither all the Gentiles go as to a jubilee. This temple
possesses many lands and much revenue; it is a very
great affair. This province has a king over it; who
has not more than twelve years to reign from jubilee
to jubilee. His manner of living is in this wise, that
is to say, when the twelve years are completed, on the
day of this feast there assemble together innumerable
people, and much money is spent in giving food to
Bramans. The king has a wooden scaffolding made,
spread over with silken hangings; and on that day he
goes to bathe at a tank with great ceremonies and
sound of music, after that he comes to the idol and
prays to it, and mounts on to the scaffolding, and there
before all the people he takes some very sharp knives
and begins to cut off his nose, and then his ears and
his lips and all his members and as much flesh of
himself as he can; and he throws it away very hurriedly
until so much of his blood is spilled that he begins to
faint, and then he cuts his throat himself. And he
performs this sacrifice to the idol; and whoever desires
to reign other twelve years, and undertake this
martyrdom for love of the idol, has to be present looking
on at this; and from that place they raise him up
as king.</q><note place='foot'>Barbosa, <hi rend='italic'>A Description of the Coasts of East Africa and Malabar in the beginning
of the Sixteenth Century</hi> (Hakluyt Society, 1866), p. 172 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Formerly the Samorin or King of Calicut, on the
Malabar coast, had also to cut his throat in public
at the end of a twelve years' reign. But towards the
end of the seventeenth century the rule had been
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
modified as follows: <q>A new custom is followed by
the modern Samorins, that jubilee is proclaimed
throughout his dominions, at the end of twelve years,
and a tent is pitched for him in a spacious plain, and a
great feast is celebrated for ten or twelve days, with
mirth and jollity, guns firing night and day, so at the
end of the feast any four of the guests that have a mind
to gain a crown by a desperate action, in fighting their
way through 30 or 40,000 of his guards, and kill the
Samorin in his tent, he that kills him succeeds him in
his empire. In anno 1695, one those jubilees happened,
and the tent pitched near Pennany, a sea-port
of his, about fifteen leagues to the southward of Calicut.
There were but three men that would venture on
that desperate action, who fell in, with sword and
target among the guard, and, after they had killed and
wounded many were themselves killed. One of the
desperados had a nephew of fifteen or sixteen years
of age, that kept close by his uncle in the attack on
the guards, and, when he saw him fall, the youth got
through the guards into the tent, and made a stroke at
his Majesty's head, and had certainly despatched him,
if a large brass lamp which was burning over his head,
had not marred the blow; but, before he could make
another he was killed by the guards; and, I believe,
the same Samorin reigns yet. I chanced to come that
time along the coast and heard the guns for two or
three days and nights successively.</q><note place='foot'>Alex. Hamilton, <q>A new Account of the East Indies,</q> in Pinkerton's
<hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, viii. 374.</note>
</p>

<p>
In some places it appears that the people could not
trust the king to remain in full bodily and mental
vigour for more than a year; hence at the end of a
year's reign he was put to death, and a new king
<pb n='226'/><anchor id='Pg226'/>
appointed to reign in his turn a year, and suffer death
at the end of it. At least this is the conclusion to
which the following evidence points. According to
the historian Berosus, who as a Babylonian priest
spoke with ample knowledge, there was annually celebrated
in Babylon a festival called the Sacaea. It
began on the 16th day of the month Lous, and lasted
for five days. During these five days masters and
servants changed places, the servants giving orders
and the masters obeying them. A prisoner condemned
to death was dressed in the king's robes, seated on the
king's throne, allowed to issue whatever commands he
pleased, to eat, drink, and enjoy himself, and to lie
with the king's concubines. But at the end of the
five days he was stripped of his royal robes, scourged,
and crucified.<note place='foot'>Athenaeus, xiv. p. 639 c; Dio
Chrysostom, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> iv. p. 69 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (vol. i.
p. 76, ed. Dindorf). Dio Chrysostom
does not mention his authority, but
it was probably either Berosus or Ctesias.
Though the execution of the mock king
is not mentioned in the passage of
Berosus cited by Athenaeus, the
omission is probably due to the fact
that the mention of it was not germane
to Athenaeus's purpose, which was
simply to give a list of festivals at
which masters waited on their servants.
That the ζωγάνης was put to death is
further shown by Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Sat.</hi> iii.
7, 6, <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Animas vero sacratorum hominum
quos † zanas Graeci vocant, dis
debitas aestimabant</foreign>,</q> where for <foreign rend='italic'>zanas</foreign>
we should probably read ζωγάνας with
Liebrecht, in <hi rend='italic'>Philologus</hi>, xxii. 710, and
Bachofen, <hi rend='italic'>Die Sage von Tanaquil</hi>, p.
52, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi> 16. The custom, so far as
appears from our authorities, does not
date from before the Persian domination
in Babylon; but probably it was
much older. In the passage of Dio
Chrysostom ἐκρέμασαν should be translated
<q>crucified</q> (or <q>impaled</q>),
not <q>hung.</q> It is strange that this,
the regular, sense of κρεμάννυμι, as
applied to executions, should not
be noticed even in the latest edition
of Liddell and Scott's <hi rend='italic'>Greek Lexicon</hi>.
Hanging, though a mode of suicide,
was not a mode of execution in antiquity
either in the east or west. In one of
the passages cited by L. and S. for the
sense <q>to hang</q> (Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Caes.</hi> 2),
the context proves that the meaning is
<q>to crucify.</q></note> This custom might perhaps have been
explained as merely a grim jest perpetrated in a season
of jollity at the expense of an unhappy criminal. But
one circumstance&mdash;the leave given to the mock king
to enjoy the king's concubines&mdash;is decisive against this
interpretation. Considering the jealous seclusion of
<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>
an oriental despot's harem we may be quite certain
that permission to invade it would never have been
granted by the despot, least of all to a condemned
criminal, except for the very gravest cause. This
cause could hardly be other than that the condemned
man was about to die in the king's stead, and that to
make the substitution perfect it was necessary he
should enjoy the full rights of royalty during his brief
reign. There is nothing surprising in this substitution.
The rule that the king must be put to death
either on the appearance of any symptom of bodily
decay or at the end of a fixed period is certainly one
which, sooner or later, the kings would seek to abolish
or modify. We have seen that in Ethiopia and Sofala
the rule was boldly set aside by enlightened monarchs;
and that in Calicut the old custom of killing the king
at the end of twelve years was changed into a permission
granted to any one at the end of the twelve
years' period to attack the king, and, in the event of
killing him, to reign in his stead; though, as the king
took care at these times to be surrounded by his
guards, the permission was little more than a form.
Another way of modifying the stern old rule is seen
in the Babylonian custom just described. When the
time drew near for the king to be put to death (in
Babylon this appears to have been at the end of a
single year's reign) he abdicated for a few days, during
which a temporary king reigned and suffered in his
stead. At first the temporary king may have been an
innocent person, possibly a member of the king's own
family; but with the growth of civilisation the sacrifice
of an innocent person would be revolting to the public
sentiment, and accordingly a condemned criminal would
be invested with the brief and fatal sovereignty. In
<pb n='228'/><anchor id='Pg228'/>
the sequel we shall find other examples of a dying
criminal representing a dying god. For we must not
forget that the king is slain in his character of a
god, his death and resurrection, as the only means of
perpetuating the divine life unimpaired, being deemed
necessary for the salvation of his people and the world.
</p>

<p>
In some places this modified form of the old custom
has been further softened down. The king still abdicates
annually for a short time and his place is filled
by a more or less nominal sovereign; but at the close
of his short reign the latter is no longer killed, though
sometimes a mock execution still survives as a memorial
of the time when he was actually put to death. To
take examples. In the month of Méac (February) the
King of Cambodia annually abdicated for three days.
During this time he performed no act of authority, he
did not touch the seals, he did not even receive the
revenues which fell due. In his stead there reigned a
temporary king called Sdach Méac, that is, King February.
The office of temporary king was hereditary
in a family distantly connected with the royal house,
the sons succeeding the fathers and the younger
brothers the elder brothers, just as in the succession to
the real sovereignty. On a favourable day fixed by
the astrologers the temporary king was conducted by
the mandarins in triumphal procession. He rode one
of the royal elephants, seated in the royal palanquin,
and escorted by soldiers who, dressed in appropriate
costumes, represented the neighbouring peoples of
Siam, Annam, Laos, and so on. Instead of the golden
crown he wore a peaked white cap, and his regalia,
instead of being of gold encrusted with diamonds, were
of rough wood. After paying homage to the real king,
from whom he received the sovereignty for three days,
<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>
together with all the revenues accruing during that
time (though this last custom has been omitted for
some time), he moved in procession round the palace
and through the streets of the capital. On the third
day, after the usual procession, the temporary king
gave orders that the elephants should trample under
foot the <q>mountain of rice,</q> which was a scaffold of
bamboo surrounded by sheaves of rice. The people
gathered up the rice, each man taking home a little
with him to secure a good harvest. Some of it was also
taken to the king, who had it cooked and presented to
the monks.<note place='foot'>E. Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>Notice sur le Cambodge</hi>,
p. 61; J. Moura, <hi rend='italic'>Le Royaume du
Cambodge</hi>, i. 327 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> For the connection
of the temporary king's family with the
royal house, see Aymonier, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p.
36 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In Siam on the sixth day of the moon in the
sixth month (the end of April) a temporary king is
appointed, who for three days enjoys the royal prerogatives,
the real king remaining shut up in his palace.
This temporary king sends his numerous satellites in
all directions to seize and confiscate whatever they can
find in the bazaar and open shops; even the ships and
junks which arrive in harbour during the three days
are confiscated to him and must be redeemed. He
goes to a field in the middle of the city, whither is
brought a gilded plough drawn by gaily-decked oxen.
After the plough has been anointed and the oxen
rubbed with incense, the mock king traces nine furrows
with the plough, followed by aged dames of the palace
scattering the first seed of the season. As soon as the
nine furrows are drawn, the crowd of spectators rushes
in and scrambles for the seed which has just been sown,
believing that, mixed with the seed-rice, it will ensure
a plentiful crop. Then the oxen are unyoked, and
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
rice, maize, sesame, sago, bananas, sugar-cane, melons,
etc. are set before them; whatever they eat first will,
it is thought, be dear in the year following, though
some people interpret the omen in the opposite sense.
During this time the temporary king stands leaning
against a tree with his right foot resting on his left
knee. From standing thus on one foot he is popularly
known as King Hop; but his official title is Phaya
Phollathep, <q>Lord of the Heavenly Hosts.</q><note place='foot'>Pallegoix, <hi rend='italic'>Description du Royaume
Thai ou Siam</hi>, i. 250; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Völker des östlichen Asien</hi>, iii. 305-309,
526-528; Turpin, <hi rend='italic'>History of Siam</hi>, in
Pinkerton's <hi rend='italic'>Voyages and Travels</hi>, ix.
581 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Bowring (<hi rend='italic'>Siam</hi>, i. 158 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>)
copies, as usual, from Pallegoix.</note> He is
a sort of Minister of Agriculture; all disputes about
fields, rice, and so on, are referred to him. There is
moreover another ceremony in which he personates the
king. It takes place in the second month (which falls
in the cold season) and lasts three days. He is conducted
in procession to an open place opposite the
Temple of the Brahmans, where there are a number of
poles dressed like May-poles, upon which the Brahmans
swing. All the while that they swing and dance,
the Lord of the Heavenly Hosts has to stand on one
foot upon a seat which is made of bricks plastered over,
covered with a white cloth, and hung with tapestry.
He is supported by a wooden frame with a gilt canopy,
and two Brahmans stand one on each side of him. The
dancing Brahmans carry buffalo horns with which they
draw water from a large copper caldron and sprinkle it
on the people; this is supposed to bring good luck,
causing the people to dwell in peace and quiet, health
and prosperity. The time during which the Lord of
the Heavenly Hosts has to stand on one foot is about
three hours. This is thought <q>to prove the dispositions
of the Devattas and spirits.</q> If he lets his foot down
<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>
<q>he is liable to forfeit his property and have his family
enslaved by the king; as it is believed to be a bad
omen, portending destruction to the state, and instability
to the throne. But if he stand firm he is believed
to have gained a victory over evil spirits, and he has
moreover the privilege, ostensibly at least, of seizing
any ship which may enter the harbour during these
three days, and taking its contents, and also of entering
any open shop in the town and carrying away what he
chooses.</q><note place='foot'>Lieut. Col. James Low, <q>On the
Laws of Muung Thai or Siam,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Journal
of the Indian Archipelago</hi>, i. (Singapore,
1847) p. 339; Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Völker
des östlichen Asien</hi>, iii. 98, 314, 526 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In Upper Egypt on the first day of the solar year
by Coptic reckoning, that is on 10th September, when
the Nile has generally reached its highest point, the
regular government is suspended for three days and
every town chooses its own ruler. This temporary
lord wears a sort of tall fool's cap and a long flaxen
beard, and is enveloped in a strange mantle. With a
wand of office in his hand and attended by men disguised
as scribes, executioners, etc., he proceeds to the
Governor's house. The latter allows himself to be
deposed; and the mock king, mounting the throne,
holds a tribunal, to the decisions of which even the
governor and his officials must bow. After three days
the mock king is condemned to death; the envelope
or shell in which he was encased is committed to the
flames, and from its ashes the Fellah creeps forth.<note place='foot'>C. B. Klunzinger, <hi rend='italic'>Bilder aus Ober-ägypten,
der Wüste und dem Rothen
Meere</hi>, p. 180 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes the temporary king occupies the throne,
not annually, but once for all at the beginning of each
reign. Thus in the kingdom of Jambi (in Sumatra) it
is the custom that at the beginning of a new reign
a man of the people should occupy the throne and
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
exercise the royal prerogatives for a single day. The
origin of the custom is explained by a tradition that
there were once five royal brothers, the four elder
of whom all declined the crown on the ground of
various bodily defects, leaving it to their youngest
brother. But the eldest occupied the throne for one
day, and reserved for his descendants a similar privilege
at the beginning of every reign. Thus the office of
temporary king is hereditary in a family akin to the
royal house.<note place='foot'>J. W. Boers, <q>Oud volksgebruik in het Rijk van Jambi,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift
voor Neêrland's Indië</hi>, iii. (1840), dl. i. 372 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In Bilaspur it seems to be the custom,
after the death of a Rajah, for a Brahman to eat rice
out of the dead Rajah's hand, and then to occupy the
throne for a year. At the end of the year the Brahman
receives presents and is dismissed from the territory,
being forbidden apparently to return. <q>The idea seems
to be that the spirit of the Rájá enters into the Bráhman
who eats the <foreign rend='italic'>khír</foreign> (rice and milk) out of his hand when
he is dead, as the Brahman is apparently carefully
watched during the whole year, and not allowed to go
away.</q> The same or a similar custom is believed to
obtain among the hill states about Kángrá.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, i. 674.</note> At the
installation of a prince of Carinthia a peasant, in whose
family the office was hereditary, ascended a marble
stone which stood surrounded by meadows in a spacious
valley; on his right stood a black mother-cow, on his
left an ugly mare. A rustic crowd gathered about
him. Then the future prince, dressed as a peasant
and carrying a shepherd's staff, drew near, attended by
courtiers and magistrates. On perceiving him the
peasant called out, <q>Who is this whom I see coming
so proudly along?</q> The people answered, <q>The
<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>
prince of the land.</q> The peasant was then prevailed
on to surrender the marble seat to the prince on condition
of receiving sixty pence, the cow and mare, and
exemption from taxes. But before yielding his place
he gave the prince a light blow on the cheek.<note place='foot'>Aeneas Sylvius, <hi rend='italic'>Opera</hi> (Bâle,
1571), p. 409 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Rechtsalterthümer</hi>, p. 253. According
to Grimm (who does not refer to Aeneas
Sylvius) the cow and mare stood beside
the prince, not the peasant.</note>
</p>

<p>
Some points about these temporary kings deserve
to be specially noticed before we pass to the next
branch of the evidence. In the first place, the Cambodian
and Siamese examples bring clearly out the
fact that it is especially the divine or supernatural functions
of the king which are transferred to his temporary
substitute. This appears from the belief that by keeping
up his foot the temporary king of Siam gained a victory
over the evil spirits; whereas by letting it down he
imperilled the existence of the state. Again, the Cambodian
ceremony of trampling down the <q>mountain
of rice,</q> and the Siamese ceremony of opening the
ploughing and sowing, are charms to produce a plentiful
harvest, as appears from the belief that those who carry
home some of the trampled rice or of the seed sown
will thereby secure a good crop. But the task of making
the crops grow, thus deputed to the temporary kings,
is one of the supernatural functions regularly supposed
to be discharged by kings in primitive society. The
rule that the mock king must stand on one foot upon
a raised seat in the rice-field was perhaps originally
meant as a charm to make the crop grow high; at
least this was the object of a similar ceremony observed
by the old Prussians. The tallest girl, standing on one
foot upon a seat, with her lap full of cakes, a cup
of brandy in her right hand and a piece of elm-bark
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
or linden-bark in her left, prayed to the god Waizganthos
that the flax might grow as high as she
was standing. Then, after draining the cup, she had
it refilled, and poured the brandy on the ground as
an offering to Waizganthos, and threw down the cakes
for his attendant sprites. If she remained steady on
one foot throughout the ceremony, it was an omen
that the flax crop would be good; but if she let her
foot down, it was feared that the crop might fail.<note place='foot'>Lasicius, <q>De diis Samagitarum
caeterorumque Sarmatarum,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Respublica
sive Status Regni Poloniae,
Lituaniae, Prussiae, Livoniae</hi>, etc.
(Elzevir, 1627), p. 306 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> edited
by W. Mannhardt in <hi rend='italic'>Magazin herausgegeben
von der Lettisch-Literärischen
Gesellschaft</hi>, xiv. 91 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
The gilded plough with which the Siamese mock king
opens the ploughing may be compared with the bronze
ploughs which the Etruscans employed at the ceremony
of founding cities;<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> v. 19, 13.</note> in both cases the use of
iron was probably forbidden on superstitious grounds.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Another point to notice about these temporary
kings is that in two places (Cambodia and Jambi)
they come of a stock which is believed to be akin
to the royal family. If the view here taken of the
origin of these temporary kingships is correct, the fact
that the temporary king is sometimes of the same race
as the real king admits of a ready explanation. When
the king first succeeded in getting the life of another
accepted as a sacrifice in lieu of his own, he would
have to show that the death of that other would serve
the purpose quite as well as his own would have done.
Now it was as a god that the king had to die; therefore
the substitute who died for him had to be invested,
at least for the occasion, with the divine attributes of
the king. This, as we have just seen, was certainly
the case with the temporary kings of Siam and Cambodia;
<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>
they were invested with the supernatural
functions, which in an earlier stage of society were
the special attributes of the king. But no one could
so well represent the king in his divine character as
his son, who might be supposed to share the divine
afflatus of his father. No one, therefore, could so
appropriately die for the king and, through him, for
the whole people, as the king's son. There is evidence
that amongst the Semites of Western Asia (the very
region where the redemption of the king's life by the
sacrifice of another comes out so unmistakably in
the Sacaean festival) the king, in a time of national
danger, sometimes gave his own son to die as a
sacrifice for the people. Thus Philo of Byblus,
in his work on the Jews, says: <q>It was an ancient
custom in a crisis of great danger that the ruler of a
city or nation should give his beloved son to die for
the whole people, as a ransom offered to the avenging
demons; and the children thus offered were slain with
mystic rites. So Cronus, whom the Phoenicians call
Israel, being king of the land and having an only-begotten
son called Jeoud (for in the Phoenician tongue
Jeoud signifies <q>only-begotten</q>), dressed him in royal
robes and sacrificed him upon an altar in a time of war,
when the country was in great danger from the enemy.</q><note place='foot'>Philo of Byblus, quoted by Eusebius, <hi rend='italic'>Praepar. Evang.</hi> i. 10, 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
When the King of Moab was besieged by the Israelites
and hard beset, he took his eldest son, who should
have reigned in his stead, and offered him for a burnt
offering on the wall.<note place='foot'>2 Kings iii. 27.</note> But amongst the Semites the
practice of sacrificing their children was not confined
to kings. In times of great calamity, such as
pestilence, drought, or defeat in war, the Phoenicians
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
used to sacrifice one of their dearest to Baal. <q>Phoenician
history,</q> says an ancient writer, <q>is full of such
sacrifices.</q><note place='foot'>Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstin.</hi> ii. 56.</note> When the Carthaginians were defeated
and besieged by Agathocles, they ascribed their disasters
to the wrath of Baal; for whereas in former
times they had been wont to sacrifice to him their own
children, they had latterly fallen into the habit of buying
children and rearing them to be victims. So, to
appease the angry god, two hundred children of the
noblest families were picked out for sacrifice, and the
tale of victims was swelled by not less than three
hundred more who volunteered to die for the fatherland.
They were sacrificed by being placed, one by
one, on the sloping hands of the brazen image, from
which they rolled into a pit of fire.<note place='foot'>Diodorus, xx. 14.</note> If an aristocracy
thus adopted the practice of sacrificing other people's
children instead of their own, kings may very well
have followed or set the example. A final mitigation
of the custom would be the substitution of condemned
criminals for innocent victims. Such a substitution
is known to have taken place in the human sacrifices
annually offered in Rhodes to Baal.<note place='foot'>Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstin.</hi> ii. 54.</note>
</p>

<p>
The custom of sacrificing children, especially the
first born, is not peculiarly Semitic. In some tribes
of New South Wales the first-born child of every
woman was eaten by the tribe as part of a religious
ceremony.<note place='foot'>Brough Smyth, <hi rend='italic'>Aborigines of
Victoria</hi>, ii. 311.</note> The Indians of Florida sacrificed their
first-born male children.<note place='foot'>Strachey, <hi rend='italic'>Historie of travaille into
Virginia Britannia</hi> (Hakluyt Society),
p. 84.</note> Amongst the people of
Senjero in Eastern Africa we are told that many
families <q>must offer up their first-born sons as sacrifices,
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
because once upon a time, when summer and
winter were jumbled together in a bad season, and
the fruits of the earth would not ripen, the soothsayers
enjoined it. At that time a great pillar
of iron is said to have stood at the entrance of
the capital, which by the advice of the soothsayers
was broken down by order of the king, upon which
the seasons became regular again. To avert the
recurrence of such a confusion of the seasons, the
soothsayers are reported to have enjoined the king
to pour human blood once a year on the base of the
broken shaft of the pillar, and also upon the throne.
Since then certain families are obliged to deliver up
their first-born sons, who are sacrificed at an appointed
time.</q><note place='foot'>J. L. Krapf, <hi rend='italic'>Travels, Researches,
and Missionary Labours during an
Eighteen Years' Residence in Eastern
Africa</hi>, p. 69 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Dr. Krapf, who
reports the custom at second hand,
thinks that the existence of the pillar
may be doubted, but that the rest of
the story harmonises well enough with
African superstition.</note> The heathen Russians often sacrificed their
first-born to the god Perun.<note place='foot'>F. J. Mone, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Heidenthums
im nördlichen Europa</hi>, i.
119.</note>
</p>

<p>
The condemnation and pretended death by fire of
the mock king in Egypt is probably a reminiscence
of a real custom of burning him. Evidence of a
practice of burning divine personages will be forthcoming
later on. In Bilaspur the expulsion of the
Brahman who had occupied the king's throne for
a year is perhaps a substitute for putting him to
death.
</p>

<p>
The explanation here given of the custom of
killing divine persons assumes, or at least is readily
combined with, the idea that the soul of the slain
divinity is transmitted to his successor. Of this transmission
I have no direct proof; and so far a link in
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
the chain of evidence is wanting. But if I cannot
prove by actual examples this succession to the soul
of the slain god, it can at least be made probable
that such a succession was supposed to take place.
For it has been already shown that the soul of the
incarnate deity is often supposed to transmigrate at
death into another incarnation;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and if this takes
place when the death is a natural one, there seems
no reason why it should not take place when the
death is a violent one. Certainly the idea that the
soul of a dying person may be transmitted to his
successor is perfectly familiar to primitive peoples.
In Nias the eldest son usually succeeds his father
in the chieftainship. But if from any bodily or
mental defect the eldest son is incapacitated from
ruling, the father determines in his life-time which
of his sons shall succeed him. In order, however,
to establish his right of succession it is necessary
that the son upon whom his father's choice falls shall
catch in his mouth or in a bag the last breath, and
with it the soul, of the dying chief. For whoever
catches his last breath is chief equally with the
appointed successor. Hence the other brothers, and
sometimes also strangers, crowd round the dying
man to catch his soul as it passes. The houses in
Nias are raised above the ground on posts, and it
has happened that when the dying man lay with his
face on the floor, one of the candidates has bored a
hole in the floor and sucked in the chief's last
breath through a bamboo tube. When the chief has
no son, his soul is caught in a bag, which is fastened
to an image made to represent the deceased; the
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
soul is then believed to pass into the image.<note place='foot'>Nieuwenhuisen en Rosenberg,
<q>Verslag omtrent het eiland Nias,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen van het Batav.
Genootschap van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</hi>,
xxx. 85; Rosenberg, <hi rend='italic'>Der
Malayische Archipel</hi>, p. 160; Chatelin,
<q>Godsdienst en bijgeloof der Niassers,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Tijdschrift voor Indische Taal- Land- en
Volkenkunde</hi>, xxvi. 142 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Sundermann,
<q>Die Insel Nias und die
Mission daselbst,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Allgemeine Missions-Zeitschrift</hi>,
xi. 445.</note>
Amongst the Takilis or Carrier Indians of North-West
America, when a corpse is burned the priest
pretends to catch the soul of the deceased in his hands,
which he closes with many gesticulations. He then
communicates the captured soul to the dead man's
successor by throwing his hands towards and blowing
upon him. The person to whom the soul is thus
communicated takes the name and rank of the
deceased. On the death of a chief the priest thus
fills a responsible and influential position, for he may
transmit the soul to whom he will, though, doubtless,
he generally follows the regular line of succession.<note place='foot'>Ch. Wilkes, <hi rend='italic'>Narrative of the U. S.
Exploring Expedition</hi> (London, 1845),
iv. 453; <hi rend='italic'>U. S. Exploring Expedition,
Ethnography and Philology</hi>, by H.
Hale, p. 203.</note>
Algonkin women who wished to become mothers
flocked to the side of a dying person in the hope of
receiving and being impregnated by the passing soul.
Amongst the Seminoles of Florida when a woman
died in childbed the infant was held over her face
to receive her parting spirit.<note place='foot'>D. G. Brinton, <hi rend='italic'>Myths of the New
World</hi>, p. 270 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The Romans caught
the breath of dying friends in their mouths, and so
received into themselves the soul of the departed.<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iv. 685;
Cicero, <hi rend='italic'>In Verr.</hi> ii. 5, 45; K. F.
Hermann, <hi rend='italic'>Griech. Privatalterthümer</hi>,
ed. Blumner, p. 362 <hi rend='italic'>note</hi> 1.</note>
The same custom is said to be still practised in
Lancashire.<note place='foot'>Harland and Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Lancashire
Folk-lore</hi>, p. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> We may therefore fairly suppose that
when the divine king or priest is put to death his
spirit is believed to pass into his successor.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='2. Killing the tree-spirit.'/>
<head>§ 2.&mdash;Killing the tree-spirit.</head>

<p>
It remains to ask what light the custom of killing
the divine king or priest sheds upon the subject of our
inquiry. In the first chapter we saw reason to suppose
that the King of the Wood was regarded as an incarnation
of the tree-spirit or of the spirit of vegetation,
and that as such he would be endowed, in the belief of
his worshippers, with a supernatural power of making
the trees to bear fruit, the crops to grow, and so on.
His life must therefore have been held very precious
by his worshippers, and was probably hedged in
by a system of elaborate precautions or taboos
like those by which, in so many places, the life of
the god-man has been guarded against the malignant
influence of demons and sorcerers. But we have seen
that the very value attached to the life of the man-god
necessitates his violent death as the only means
of preserving it from the inevitable decay of age.
The same reasoning would apply to the King of the
Wood; he too had to be killed in order that the
divine spirit, incarnate in him, might be transferred
in unabated vigour to his successor. The rule that
he held office till a stronger should slay him might
be supposed to secure both the preservation of his
divine life in full vigour and its transference to
a suitable successor as soon as that vigour began
to be impaired. For so long as he could maintain
his position by the strong hand, it might be inferred
that his natural force was not abated; whereas his
defeat and death at the hands of another proved
that his strength was beginning to fail and that it
was time his divine life should be lodged in a less
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
dilapidated tabernacle. This explanation of the rule
that the King of the Wood had to be slain by his
successor at least renders that rule perfectly intelligible.
Moreover it is countenanced by the analogy of the
Chitombé, upon whose life the existence of the world
was supposed to hang, and who was therefore slain by
his successor as soon as he showed signs of breaking
up. Again, the terms on which in later times the
King of Calicut held office are identical with those
attached to the office of King of the Wood, except
that whereas the former might be assailed by a
candidate at any time, the King of Calicut might
only be attacked once every twelve years. But as
the leave granted to the King of Calicut to reign
so long as he could defend himself against all
comers was a mitigation of the old rule which set a
fixed term to his life, so we may conjecture that the
similar permission granted to the King of the Wood
was a mitigation of an older custom of putting him
to death at the end of a set period. In both cases the
new rule gave to the god-man at least a chance for
his life, which under the old rule was denied him; and
people probably reconciled themselves to the change
by reflecting that so long as the god-man could
maintain himself by the sword against all assaults,
there was no reason to apprehend that the fatal
decay had set in.
</p>

<p>
The conjecture that the King of the Wood was
formerly put to death at the expiry of a set term,
without being allowed a chance for his life, will be
confirmed if evidence can be adduced of a custom
of periodically killing his counterparts, the human
representatives of the tree-spirit, in Northern Europe.
Now in point of fact such a custom has left unmistakable
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
traces of itself in the rural festivals of the
peasantry. To take examples.
</p>

<p>
In Lower Bavaria the Whitsuntide representative
of the tree-spirit&mdash;the <foreign rend='italic'>Pfingstl</foreign> as he was called&mdash;was
clad from top to toe in leaves and flowers. On his
head he wore a high pointed cap, the ends of which
rested on his shoulders, only two holes being left in it
for his eyes. The cap was covered with water flowers
and surmounted with a nosegay of peonies. The
sleeves of his coat were also made of water-plants, and
the rest of his body was enveloped in alder and hazel
leaves. On each side of him marched a boy holding
up one of the <foreign rend='italic'>Pfingstl</foreign>'s arms. These two boys
carried drawn swords, and so did most of the others
who formed the procession. They stopped at every
house where they hoped to receive a present; and the
people, in hiding, soused the leaf-clad boy with water.
All rejoiced when he was well drenched. Finally he
waded into the brook up to his middle; whereupon
one of the boys, standing on the bridge, pretended
to cut off his head.<note place='foot'>Fr. Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen Mythologie</hi>, i. 235 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 320 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Wurmlingen in Swabia
a score of young fellows dress themselves on Whit-Monday
in white shirts and white trousers, with
red scarves round their waists and swords hanging
from the scarves. They ride on horse-back into
the wood, led by two trumpeters blowing their
trumpets. In the wood they cut down leafy oak
branches, in which they envelop from head to foot
him who was the last of their number to ride out of
the village. His legs, however, are encased separately,
so that he may be able to mount his horse again.
Further, they give him a long artificial neck, with an
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
artificial head and a false face on the top of it. Then
a May-tree is cut, generally an aspen or beech about
ten feet high; and being decked with coloured
handkerchiefs and ribbons it is entrusted to a special
<q>May-bearer.</q> The cavalcade then returns with
music and song to the village. Amongst the personages
who figure in the procession are a Moorish king
with a sooty face and a crown on his head, a Dr.
Iron-Beard, a corporal, and an executioner. They
halt on the village green, and each of the characters
makes a speech in rhyme. The executioner announces
that the leaf-clad man has been condemned to death
and cuts off his false head. Then the riders race to
the May-tree, which has been set up a little way off.
The first man who succeeds in wrenching it from the
ground as he gallops past keeps it with all its decorations.
The ceremony is observed every second or
third year.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi>, pp. 409-419;
W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p.
349 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In Saxony and Thüringen there is a Whitsuntide
ceremony called <q>chasing the Wild Man out of the
bush,</q> or <q>fetching the Wild Man out of the wood.</q>
A young fellow is enveloped in leaves or moss and
called the Wild Man. He hides in the wood and the
other lads of the village go out to seek him. They
find him, lead him captive out of the wood, and fire at
him with blank muskets. He falls like dead to the
ground, but a lad dressed as a doctor bleeds him, and
he comes to life again. At this they rejoice and
binding him fast on a waggon take him to the village,
where they tell all the people how they have caught the
Wild Man. At every house they receive a gift.<note place='foot'>E. Sommer, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche aus Sachsen und Thüringen</hi>,
p. 154 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>,
p. 335 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
the Erzgebirge the following custom was annually observed
at Shrovetide about the beginning of the
seventeenth century. Two men disguised as Wild
Men, the one in brushwood and moss, the other
in straw, were led about the streets, and at last taken
to the market-place, where they were chased up and
down, shot and stabbed. Before falling they reeled
about with strange gestures and spirted blood on the
people from bladders which they carried. When they
were down, the huntsmen placed them on boards
and carried them to the alehouse, the miners marching
beside them and winding blasts on their mining
tools as if they had taken a noble head of
game.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 336.</note> A very similar Shrovetide custom is still
observed in the neighbourhood of Schluckenau
(Bohemia). A man dressed up as a Wild Man is
chased through several streets till he comes to a narrow
lane across which a cord is stretched. He stumbles
over the cord and, falling to the ground, is overtaken
and caught by his pursuers. The executioner runs up
and stabs with his sword a bladder filled with blood
which the Wild Man wears round his body; so the
Wild Man dies, while a stream of blood reddens the
ground. Next day a straw-man, made up to look like
the Wild Man, is placed on a litter, and, accompanied
by a great crowd, is taken to a pool into which it is
thrown by the executioner. The ceremony is called
<q>burying the Carnival.</q><note place='foot'>Reinsberg&mdash;Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender
aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 61; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 336 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In Semic (Bohemia) the custom of beheading the
King is observed on Whit-Monday. A troop of
young people disguise themselves; each is girt with
a girdle of bark and carries a wooden sword and a
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
trumpet of willow-bark. The King wears a robe
of tree-bark adorned with flowers, on his head is a
crown of bark decked with flowers and branches,
his feet are wound about with ferns, a mask hides
his face, and for a sceptre he has a hawthorn switch
in his hand. A lad leads him through the village
by a rope fastened to his foot, while the rest
dance about, blow their trumpets, and whistle. In
every farmhouse the King is chased round the room,
and one of the troop, amid much noise and outcry,
strikes with his sword a blow on the King's robe of
bark till it rings again. Then a gratuity is demanded.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 263; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 343.</note>
The ceremony of decapitation, which is here somewhat
slurred over, is carried out with a greater semblance of
reality in other parts of Bohemia. Thus in some villages
of the Königgrätz district on Whit-Monday the
girls assemble under one lime-tree and the young men
under another, all dressed in their best and tricked out
with ribbons. The young men twine a garland for the
Queen and the girls for the King. When they have
chosen the King and Queen they all go in procession,
two and two, to the alehouse, from the balcony of
which the crier proclaims the names of the King and
Queen. Both are then invested with the insignia of
their dignity and are crowned with the garlands,
while the music plays up. Then some one gets on
a bench and accuses the King of various offences,
such as ill-treating the cattle. The King appeals to
witnesses and a trial ensues, at the close of which the
judge, who carries a white wand as his badge of office,
pronounces a verdict of <q>guilty</q> or <q>not guilty.</q> If
the verdict is <q>guilty</q> the judge breaks his wand, the
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
King kneels on a white cloth, all heads are bared, and
a soldier sets three or four hats, one above the other,
on the King's head. The judge then pronounces the
word <q>guilty</q> thrice in a loud voice, and orders the
crier to behead the King. The crier obeys by striking
off the King's hats with his wooden sword.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 269 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
But perhaps, for our purpose, the most instructive of
these mimic executions is the following Bohemian one,
which has been in part described already.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some
places of the Pilsen district (Bohemia) on Whit-Monday
the King is dressed in bark, ornamented with flowers
and ribbons; he wears a crown of gilt paper and rides
a horse, which is also decked with flowers. Attended
by a judge, an executioner and other characters, and
followed by a train of soldiers, all mounted, he rides to
the village square, where a hut or arbour of green
boughs has been erected under the May-trees, which
are firs, freshly cut, peeled to the top, and dressed with
flowers and ribbons. After the dames and maidens of
the village have been criticised and a frog beheaded,
in the way already described, the cavalcade rides to a
place previously determined upon, in a straight, broad
street. Here they draw up in two lines and the King
takes to flight. He is given a short start and rides off
at full speed, pursued by the whole troop. If they
fail to catch him he remains King for another year,
and his companions must pay his score at the alehouse
in the evening. But if they overtake and catch him
he is scourged with hazel rods or beaten with the
wooden swords and compelled to dismount. Then the
executioner asks, <q>Shall I behead this King?</q> The
answer is given, <q>Behead him;</q> the executioner
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
brandishes his axe, and with the words, <q>One, two,
three, let the King headless be!</q> he strikes off the
King's crown. Amid the loud cries of the bystanders
the King sinks to the ground; then he is laid on a bier
and carried to the nearest farmhouse.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 264 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 353 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In the personages who are thus slain in mimicry it
is impossible not to recognise representatives of the
tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation, as he is supposed to
manifest himself in spring. The bark, leaves, and
flowers in which the actors are dressed, and the season
of the year at which they appear, show that they belong
to the same class as the Grass King, King of the May,
Jack-in-the-Green, and other representatives of the
vernal spirit of vegetation which we examined in the
first chapter. As if to remove any possible doubt on
this head, we find that in two cases<note place='foot'>See pp. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>.</note> these slain men
are brought into direct connection with May-trees,
which are (as we have seen) the impersonal, as the
May King, Grass King, etc., are the personal representatives
of the tree-spirit. The drenching of the <foreign rend='italic'>Pfingstl</foreign>
with water and his wading up to the middle into the
brook are, therefore, no doubt rain-charms like those
which have been already described.<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
But if these personages represent, as they certainly
do, the spirit of vegetation in spring, the question
arises, Why kill them? What is the object of slaying
the spirit of vegetation at any time and above
all in spring, when his services are most wanted?
The only answer to this question seems to be given
in the explanation already proposed of the custom
of killing the divine king or priest. The divine
life, incarnate in a material and mortal body, is liable
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
to be tainted and corrupted by the weakness of
the frail medium in which it is for a time enshrined;
and if it is to be saved from the increasing enfeeblement
which it must necessarily share with its human
incarnation as he advances in years, it must be detached
from him before, or at least as soon as, he exhibits
signs of decay, in order to be transferred to a vigorous
successor. This is done by killing the old representative
of the god and conveying the divine spirit from
him to a new incarnation. The killing of the god,
that is, of his human incarnation, is, therefore, only a
necessary step to his revival or resurrection in a better
form. Far from being an extinction of the divine
spirit, it is only the beginning of a purer and stronger
manifestation of it. If this explanation holds good of
the custom of killing divine kings and priests in
general, it is still more obviously applicable to the
custom of annually killing the representative of the
tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation in spring. For the
decay of vegetation in winter is readily interpreted by
primitive man as an enfeeblement of the spirit of vegetation;
the spirit has (he thinks) grown old and weak
and must therefore be renovated by being slain and
brought to life in a younger and fresher form. Thus the
killing of the representative of the tree-spirit in spring is
regarded as a means to promote and quicken the
growth of vegetation. For the killing of the tree-spirit
is associated always (we must suppose) implicitly, and
sometimes explicitly also, with a revival or resurrection
of him in a more youthful and vigorous form. Thus
in the Saxon and Thüringen custom, after the Wild
Man has been shot he is brought to life again by a
doctor;<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>.</note> and in the Wurmlingen ceremony there
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
figures a Dr. Iron-Beard, who probably once played
a similar part; certainly in another spring ceremony
(to be described presently) Dr. Iron-Beard pretends
to restore a dead man to life. But of this revival or
resurrection of the god we shall have more to say
anon.
</p>

<p>
The points of similarity between these North
European personages and the subject of our inquiry&mdash;the
King of the Wood or priest of Nemi&mdash;are
sufficiently striking. In these northern maskers we see
kings, whose dress of bark and leaves, along with the
hut of green boughs and the fir-trees under which they
hold their court, proclaim them unmistakably as, like
their Italian counterpart, Kings of the Wood. Like
him they die a violent death; but like him they may
escape from it for a time by their bodily strength and
agility; for in several of these northern customs the
flight and pursuit of the king is a prominent part of the
ceremony, and in one case at least if the king can outrun
his pursuers he retains his life and his office for
another year. In this last case, in fact, the king holds
office on condition of running for his life once a year,
just as the King of Calicut in later times held office on
condition of defending his life against all comers once
every twelve years, and just as the priest of Nemi held
office on condition of defending himself against any
assault at any time. In all these cases the life of the
god-man is prolonged on condition of showing, in a
severe physical contest of fight or flight, that his bodily
strength is not decayed, and that, therefore, the violent
death, which sooner or later is inevitable, may for the
present be postponed. With regard to flight it is
noticeable that flight figured conspicuously both in the
legend and the practice of the King of the Wood. He
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
had to be a runaway slave (<foreign rend='italic'>fugitivus</foreign>) in memory of the
flight of Orestes, the traditional founder of the worship;
hence the Kings of the Wood are described by an
ancient writer as <q>both strong of hand and fleet of foot.</q><note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>.</note>
Perhaps if we knew the ritual of the Arician grove fully
we might find that the king was allowed a chance for
his life by flight, like his Bohemian brother. We may
conjecture that the annual flight of the priestly king at
Rome (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>regifugium</foreign>)<note place='foot'>Marquardt, <hi rend='italic'>Römische Staatsverwaltung</hi>, iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> 323 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> was at first a flight of the same
kind; in other words, that he was originally one of those
divine kings who are either put to death after a fixed
period or allowed to prove by the strong hand or the
fleet foot that their divinity is vigorous and unimpaired.
One more point of resemblance may be
noted between the Italian King of the Wood and his
northern counterparts. In Saxony and Thüringen the
representative of the tree-spirit, after being killed, is
brought to life again by a doctor. This is exactly what
legend affirmed to have happened to the first King of
the Wood at Nemi, Hippolytus or Virbius, who after
he had been killed by his horses was restored to life
by the physician Aesculapius.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>.</note> Such a legend tallies
well with the theory that the slaying of the King of the
Wood was only a step to his revival or resurrection in
his successor.
</p>

<p>
It has been assumed that the mock killing of the
Wild Man and of the King in North European folk-custom
is a modern substitute for an ancient custom of
killing them in earnest. Those who best know the
tenacity of life possessed by folk-custom and its tendency,
with the growth of civilisation, to dwindle from
solemn ritual into mere pageant and pastime, will be
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
least likely to question the truth of this assumption.
That human sacrifices were commonly offered by the
ancestors of the civilised races of North Europe
(Celts, Teutons, and Slavs) is certain.<note place='foot'>Caesar, <hi rend='italic'>Bell. Gall.</hi> vi. 16; Adam
of Bremen, <hi rend='italic'>Descript. Insul. Aquil.</hi> c. 27;
Olaus Magnus, iii. 6; Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> i. 35 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Mone, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte
des nordischen Heidenthums</hi>, i. 69, 119,
120, 149, 187 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> It is not, therefore,
surprising that the modern peasant should do in
mimicry what his forefathers did in reality. We know
as a matter of fact that in other parts of the world mock
human sacrifices have been substituted for real ones.
Thus Captain Bourke was informed by an old chief
that the Indians of Arizona used to offer human sacrifices
at the Feast of Fire when the days are shortest.
The victim had his throat cut, his breast opened, and his
heart taken out by one of the priests. This custom
was abolished by the Mexicans, but for a long time
afterwards a modified form of it was secretly observed
as follows. The victim, generally a young man, had
his throat cut, and blood was allowed to flow freely;
but the medicine-men sprinkled <q>medicine</q> on the
gash, which soon healed up, and the man recovered.<note place='foot'>J. G. Bourke, <hi rend='italic'>Snake Dance of the
Moquis of Arizona</hi>, p. 196 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
So in the ritual of Artemis at Halae in Attica, a man's
throat was cut and the blood allowed to gush out, but
he was not killed.<note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Iphig. in Taur.</hi> 1458
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> At the funeral of a chief in Nias
slaves are sacrificed; a little of their hair is cut off, and
then they are beheaded. The victims are generally
purchased for the purpose, and their number is proportioned
to the wealth and power of the deceased.
But if the number required is excessively great or cannot
be procured, some of the chief's own slaves undergo
a sham sacrifice. They are told, and believe, that
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
they are about to be decapitated; their heads are
placed on a log and their necks struck with the back
of a sword. The fright drives some of them crazy.<note place='foot'>Nieuwenhuisen en Rosenberg, <q>Verslag
omtrent het eiland Nias,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandelingen
van het Batav. Genootsch.
van Kunsten en Wetenschappen</hi>, xxx. 43.</note>
When a Hindoo has killed or ill-treated an ape, a
bird of prey of a certain kind, or a cobra capella, in
the presence of the worshippers of Vishnu, he must
expiate his offence by the pretended sacrifice and
resurrection of a human being. An incision is made
in the victim's arm, the blood flows, he grows faint,
falls, and feigns to die. Afterwards he is brought to
life by being sprinkled with blood drawn from the
thigh of a worshipper of Vishnu. The crowd of spectators
is fully convinced of the reality of this simulated
death and resurrection.<note place='foot'>J. A. Dubois, Moeurs, <hi rend='italic'>Institutions et
Cérémonies des Peuples de l'Inde</hi>, i. 151 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Sometimes the mock
sacrifice is carried out, not on a living person but on
an image. Thus an Indian law-book, the <hi rend='italic'>Calica
Puran</hi>, prescribes that when the sacrifice of lions,
tigers, or human beings is required, an image of a
lion, tiger, or man shall be made with butter, paste, or
barley meal, and sacrificed instead.<note place='foot'><q>The Rudhirádhyáyă, or sanguinary
chapter,</q> translated from the
<hi rend='italic'>Calica Puran</hi> by W. C. Blaquiere, in
<hi rend='italic'>Asiatick Researches</hi>, v. 376 (8vo. ed.
London, 1807).</note> Some of the
Gonds of India formerly offered human sacrifices; they
now sacrifice straw-men instead.<note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of Bengal</hi>, p. 281.</note> Colonel Dalton
was told that in some of their villages the Bhagats
(Hindooised Oraons) <q>annually make an image of a
man in wood, put clothes and ornaments on it, and
present it before the altar of a Mahádeo. The person
who officiates as priest on the occasion says: <q>O,
Mahádeo, we sacrifice this man to you according to
ancient customs. Give us rain in due season, and a
<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>
plentiful harvest.</q> Then with one stroke of the axe
the head of the image is struck off, and the body is
removed and buried.</q><note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of Bengal</hi>, p. 258 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='3. Carrying out Death.'/>
<head>§ 3.&mdash;Carrying out Death.</head>

<p>
Thus far I have offered an explanation of the
rule which required that the priest of Nemi should be
slain by his successor. The explanation claims to be
no more than probable; our scanty knowledge of the
custom and of its history forbids it to be more. But
its probability will be augmented in proportion to
the extent to which the motives and modes of thought
which it assumes can be proved to have operated in
primitive society. Hitherto the god with whose
death and resurrection we have been chiefly concerned
has been the tree-god. Tree-worship may
perhaps be regarded (though this is a conjecture)
as occupying an intermediate place in the history
of religion, between the religion of the hunter and
shepherd on the one side, whose gods are mostly
animals, and the religion of the husbandman on the
other hand, in whose worship the cultivated plants
play a leading part. If then I can show that the custom
of killing the god and the belief in his resurrection originated,
or at least existed, in the hunting and pastoral
stage of society, when the slain god was an animal, and
survived into the agricultural stage, when the slain god
was the corn or a human being representing the corn,
the probability of my explanation will have been considerably
increased. This I shall attempt to do in
the remainder of this chapter, in the course of which
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
I hope to clear up some obscurities which still
remain, and to answer some objections which may
have suggested themselves to the reader.
</p>

<p>
We start from the point at which we left off&mdash;the
spring customs of European peasantry. Besides
the ceremonies already described there are two kindred
sets of observances in which the simulated death
of a divine or supernatural being is a leading feature.
These observances are commonly known as <q>Burying
the Carnival,</q> and <q>Driving or carrying out Death.</q>
Both customs are chiefly practised, or at least best
known, on German and Slavonic ground. The former
custom is observed on the last day of the Carnival,
namely, Shrove Tuesday (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Fastnacht</foreign>), or on the first
day of Lent, namely, Ash Wednesday. The latter
custom is commonly observed on the Fourth Sunday
in Lent, which hence gets the name of Dead Sunday
(<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Todtensonntag</foreign>); but in some places it is observed a
week earlier; in others again, as amongst the Czechs
of Bohemia, a week later. Originally the date of the
celebration of the <q>Carrying out Death</q> appears not
to have been fixed, but to have depended on the appearance
of the first swallow or of some other natural
phenomenon.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii.
645; K. Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Sagenbuch der Lausitz</hi>,
ii. 58; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 86 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
<hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Das festliche Jahr</hi>, p. 77 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
Fourth Sunday in Lent is also known
as Mid-Lent, because it falls in the
middle of Lent, or as <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Laetare</foreign> from the
first word of the liturgy for the day.
In the Roman Calendar it is the Sunday
of the Rose, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Domenica rosae</foreign>.</note> A Bohemian form of the custom of
<q>Burying the Carnival</q> has been already described.<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>.</note>
The following Swabian form is obviously similar.
In the neighbourhood of Tübingen on Shrove Tuesday
a straw-man, called the Shrovetide Bear, is made
up; he is dressed in a pair of old trousers, and a
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
fresh black-pudding or two squirts filled with blood are
inserted in his neck. After a formal condemnation he
is beheaded, laid in a coffin, and on Ash Wednesday
is buried in the churchyard. This is called <q>Burying
the Carnival</q> (<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>die Fastnacht vergraben</foreign></q>).<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebraüche aus Schwaben</hi>, p. 371.</note> Amongst
some of the Saxons of Transylvania the Carnival is
hung. Thus at Braller on Ash Wednesday or Shrove
Tuesday two white and two chestnut horses draw a
sledge on which is placed a straw-man swathed in a
white cloth; beside him is a cart-wheel which is kept
turning round. Two lads disguised as old men follow
the sledge lamenting. The rest of the village lads,
mounted on horseback and decked with ribbons, accompany
the procession, which is headed by two girls
crowned with evergreen and drawn in a waggon or
sledge. A trial is held under a tree, at which lads
disguised as soldiers pronounce sentence of death.
The two old men try to rescue the straw-man and to
fly with him, but to no purpose; he is caught by the
two girls and handed over to the executioner, who hangs
him on a tree. In vain the old men try to climb up
the tree and take him down; they always tumble down,
and at last in despair they throw themselves on the
ground and weep and howl for the hanged man. An
official then makes a speech in which he declares
that the Carnival was condemned to death because
he had done them harm, by wearing out their
shoes and making them tired and sleepy.<note place='foot'>J. Haltrich, <hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde der
Siebenbürger Sachsen</hi> (Wien, 1885), p.
284 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At the
<q>Burial of Carnival</q> in Lechrain, a man dressed as a
woman in black clothes is carried on a litter or bier by
four men; he is lamented over by men disguised as
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
women in black clothes, then thrown down before
the village dung-heap, drenched with water, buried in
the dung-heap, and covered with straw.<note place='foot'>Leoprechting, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem Lechrain</hi>,
p. 162 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>,
p. 411.</note> Similarly in
Schörzingen, near Schömberg, the <q>Carnival (Shrovetide)
Fool</q> was carried all about the village on a bier,
preceded by a man dressed in white, and followed by
a devil who was dressed in black and carried chains,
which he clanked. One of the train collected gifts.
After the procession the Fool was buried under
straw and dung.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Schwaben</hi> p. 374;
cp. Birlinger, <hi rend='italic'>Volksthümlichesaus Schwaben</hi>,
ii. 55.</note> In Rottweil the <q>Carnival Fool</q>
is made drunk on Ash Wednesday and buried under
straw amid loud lamentation.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 372.</note> In Wurmlingen the
Fool is represented by a young fellow enveloped in
straw, who is led about the village by a rope as
a <q>Bear</q> on Shrove Tuesday and the preceding
day. He dances to the flute. Then on Ash Wednesday
a straw-man is made, placed on a trough,
carried out of the village to the sound of drums and
mournful music, and buried in a field.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 373.</note> In Altdorf and
Weingarten on Ash Wednesday the Fool, represented
by a straw-man, is carried about and then thrown into
the water to the accompaniment of melancholy music.
In other villages of Swabia the part of fool is played
by a live person, who is thrown into the water after
being carried about in procession.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 373, 374.</note> At Balwe, in
Westphalia, a straw-man is made on Shrove Tuesday
and thrown into the river amid rejoicings. This is
called, as usual, <q>Burying the Carnival.</q><note place='foot'>A. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Gebräuche und
Märchen aus Westfalen</hi>, ii. 130.</note> On the
evening of Shrove Tuesday, the Esthonians make a
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
straw figure called <foreign rend='italic'>metsik</foreign> or <q>wood-spirit;</q> one year
it is dressed with a man's coat and hat, next year with
a hood and a petticoat. This figure is stuck on a long
pole, carried across the boundary of the village with
loud cries of joy, and fastened to the top of a tree in
the wood. The ceremony is believed to be a protection
against all kinds of misfortune.<note place='foot'>F. J. Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem inneren
und äusseren Leben der Ehsten</hi>, p. 353.</note> Sometimes the
resurrection of the pretended dead person is enacted.
Thus, in some parts of Swabia, on Shrove Tuesday
Dr. Iron-Beard professes to bleed a sick man, who
thereupon falls as dead to the ground; but the doctor
at last restores him to life by blowing air into him
through a tube.<note place='foot'>E. Meier, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 374.</note> In the Harz mountains, when Carnival
is over, a man is laid on a baking-trough and
carried with dirges to a grave; but in the grave, instead
of the man, a glass of brandy is placed. A
speech is delivered and then the people return to the
village-green or meeting-place, where they smoke the
long clay pipes which are distributed at funerals. On
the morning of Shrove Tuesday in the following year
the brandy is dug up and the festival begins by every
one tasting the brandy which, as the phrase goes, has
come to life again.<note place='foot'>H. Pröhle, <hi rend='italic'>Harzbilder</hi>, p. 54.</note>
</p>

<p>
The ceremony of <q>Carrying out Death</q> presents
much the same features as <q>Burying the Carnival;</q>
except that the figure of Death is oftener drowned
or burned than buried, and that the carrying out of
Death is generally followed by a ceremony, or at least
accompanied by a profession, of bringing in Summer,
Spring, or Life. Thus, in some villages of Thüringen
on the Fourth Sunday of Lent, the children used to
carry a puppet of birchen twigs through the village,
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
and then threw it into a pool, while they sang, <q>We
carry the old Death out behind the herdsman's old
house; we have got Summer, and Kroden's(?) power
is destroyed.</q><note place='foot'>Aug. Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten
und Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi>, p.
193.</note> In one village of Thüringen (Dobschwitz
near Gera), the ceremony of <q>Driving out
Death</q> is still annually observed on the 1st of March.
The young people make up a figure of straw or the
like materials, dress it in old clothes which they have
begged from the houses in the village, and carry it out
and throw it into the river. On returning to the
village they announce the fact to the people, and
receive eggs and other victuals as a reward. In other
villages of Thüringen, in which the population was
originally Slavonic, the carrying out of the puppet
is accompanied with the singing of a song, which
begins, <q>Now we carry Death out of the village and
Spring into the village.</q><note place='foot'>Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 199.</note> In Bohemia the children
go out with a straw-man, representing Death, to the
end of the village, where they burn it, singing&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Now carry we Death out of the village,</q></l>
<l>The new Summer into the village,</l>
<l>Welcome dear Summer,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Green little corn!</q><note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii.
642.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
At Tabor (Bohemia) the figure of Death is carried
out of the town and flung from a high rock into the
water, while they sing&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Death swims on the water,</q></l>
<l>Summer will soon be here,</l>
<l>We carried Death away for you,</l>
<l>We brought the Summer.</l>
<l>And do thou, O holy Marketa,</l>
<l>Give us a good year</l>
<l><q rend='post'>For wheat and for rye.</q><note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender
aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 90 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>

<p>
In other parts of Bohemia they carry Death to the
end of the village, singing&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>We carry Death out of the village,</q></l>
<l>And the New Year into the village.</l>
<l>Dear Spring, we bid you welcome,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Green grass, we bid you welcome.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Behind the village they erect a pyre, on which they
burn the straw figure, reviling and scoffing at it the
while. Then they return, singing&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>We have carried away Death,</q></l>
<l>And brought Life back.</l>
<l>He has taken up his quarters in the village,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Therefore sing joyous songs.</q><note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
p. 91.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
At Nürnberg, girls of seven to eighteen years of
age, dressed in their best, carry through the streets
a little open coffin in which is a doll, hidden under a
shroud. Others carry a beech branch, with an apple
fastened to it for a head, in an open box. They sing,
<q>We carry Death into the water, it is well,</q> or, <q>We
carry Death into the water, carry him in and out
again.</q><note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii.
639 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 412.</note>
</p>

<p>
The effigy of Death is often regarded with fear
and treated with marks of hatred and contempt. In
Lusatia the figure is sometimes made to look in at the
window of a house, and it is believed that some one
in the house will die within the year unless his life
is redeemed by the payment of money.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 644; K.
Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Sagenbuch der Lausitz</hi>, ii.
55.</note> Again, after
throwing the effigy away, the bearers sometimes run
home lest Death should follow them; and if one
of them falls in running, it is believed that he will
die within the year.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 640, 643.</note> At Chrudim, in Bohemia, the
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
figure of Death is made out of a cross, with a head
and mask stuck at the top, and a shirt stretched out on
it. On the Fifth Sunday in Lent the boys take this
effigy to the nearest brook or pool, and standing in a
line throw it into the water. Then they all plunge in
after it; but as soon as it is caught no one more may
enter the water. The boy who did not enter the
water or entered it last will die within the year, and
he is obliged to carry the Death back to the village.
The effigy is then burned.<note place='foot'>Vernalecken, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen und Bräuche
des Volkes in Oesterreich</hi>, p. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender
aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 90.</note> On the other hand it is
believed that no one will die within the year in the
house out of which the figure of Death has been
carried;<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii.
640.</note> and the village out of which Death has
been driven is sometimes supposed to be protected
against sickness and plague.<note place='foot'>J. A. E. Köhler, <hi rend='italic'>Volksbrauch,
Aberglauben, Sagen und andre alte
Ueberlieferungen im Voigtlande</hi>, p.
171.</note> In some villages of
Austrian Silesia on the Saturday before Dead Sunday
an effigy is made of old clothes, hay, and straw, for
the purpose of driving Death out of the village. On
Sunday the people, armed with sticks and straps,
assemble before the house where the figure is lodged.
Four lads then draw the effigy by cords through the
village amid exultant shouts, while all the others beat
it with their sticks and straps. On reaching a field
which belongs to a neighbouring village they lay down
the figure, cudgel it soundly, and scatter the fragments
over the field. The people believe that the village
from which Death has been thus carried out will be
safe from any infectious disease for the whole year.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Das festliche
Jahr</hi>, p. 80.</note>
In Slavonia the figure of Death is cudgelled and then
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
rent in two.<note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian
People</hi>, p. 211.</note> In Poland the effigy, made of hemp and
straw, is flung into a pool or swamp with the words,
<q>The devil take thee.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 210.</note>
</p>

<p>
The custom of <q>sawing the Old Woman,</q> which is
or used to be observed in Italy and Spain on the Fourth
Sunday in Lent, is doubtless, as Grimm supposes,
merely another form of the custom of <q>carrying out
Death.</q> A great hideous figure representing the oldest
woman of the village was dragged out and sawn in
two, amid a prodigious noise made with cow-bells, pots
and pans, etc.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii.
652; H. Usener, <q>Italische Mythen,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Rheinisches Museum</hi>, N. F. xxx.
(1875) p. 191 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Palermo the ceremony used to be
still more realistic. At Mid-Lent an old woman was
drawn through the streets on a cart, attended by two
men dressed in the costume of the <hi rend='italic'>Compagnia de'Bianchi</hi>,
a society or religious order whose function it
was to attend and console prisoners condemned to
death. A scaffold was erected in a public square; the
old woman mounted it, and two mock executioners
proceeded, amid a storm of huzzas and hand-clapping,
to saw through her neck or rather through a bladder
of blood which had been previously fitted to her neck.
The blood gushed out and the old woman pretended
to swoon and die. The last of these mock executions
took place in 1737.<note place='foot'>G. Pitrè, <hi rend='italic'>Spettacoli e feste popolari
siciliane</hi> (Palermo, 1881), p. 207 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Florence, during the fifteenth
and sixteenth centuries, the Old Woman was represented
by a figure stuffed with walnuts and dried figs
and fastened to the top of a ladder. At Mid-Lent this
effigy was sawn through the middle under the <foreign rend='italic'>Loggie</foreign>
of the Mercato Nuovo, and as the dried fruits tumbled
out they were scrambled for by the crowd. A trace of
the custom is still to be seen in the practice, observed
<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>
by urchins, of secretly pinning paper ladders to the
shoulders of women of the lower classes who happen
to show themselves in the streets on the morning of
Mid-Lent.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Archivio per lo studio delle tradizioni
popolari</hi>, iv. (1885) p. 294 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> A similar custom is observed by urchins
in Rome; and at Naples on the 1st of April boys cut
strips of cloth into the shape of saws, smear them with
gypsum, and strike passers-by with their <q>saws</q> on
the back, thus imprinting the figure of a saw upon their
clothes.<note place='foot'>H. Usener, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 193.</note> At Montalto in Calabria boys go about at
Mid-Lent with little saws made of cane and jeer at old
people, who therefore generally stay indoors on that
day. The Calabrian women meet together at this
time and feast on figs, chestnuts, honey, etc.; this they
call <q>sawing the Old Woman</q>&mdash;a reminiscence probably
of a custom like the old Florentine one.<note place='foot'>Vincenzo Dorsa, <hi rend='italic'>La tradizione
greco-latina negli usi e nelle credenze
popolari della Calabria citeriore</hi> (Cosenza,
1884), p. 43 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In Barcelona on the day in question boys run about
the streets, some with saws, others with billets of wood,
others again with cloths in which they collect gratuities.
They sing a song in which it is said that they are looking
for the oldest woman of the city for the purpose of
sawing her in two in honour of Mid-Lent; at last,
pretending to have found her, they saw something in
two and burn it. A like custom is found amongst the
South Slavs. In Lent the Croats tell their children
that at noon an old woman is being sawn in two outside
the gates; and in Carniola also the saying is current
that at Mid-Lent an old woman is taken out of the
village and sawn in two. The North Slavonian expression
for keeping Mid-Lent is <foreign rend='italic'>bábu rezati</foreign>, that is,
<q>sawing the Old Wife.</q><note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii.
652; H. Usener, <q>Italische Mythen,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Rheinisches Museum</hi>, N. F. xxx.
1875, p. 191 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>

<p>
In the preceding ceremonies the return of Spring,
Summer, or Life, as a sequel to the expulsion of Death,
is only implied or at most announced. In the following
ceremonies it is plainly enacted. In some parts of
Bohemia the effigy of Death is buried at sunset; then
the girls go out into the wood and cut down a young
tree with a green crown, hang a doll dressed as a
woman on it, deck the whole with green, red, and
white ribbons, and march in procession with their
<foreign rend='italic'>Líto</foreign> (Summer) into the village, collecting gifts and
singing&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>We carried Death out of the village,</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>We are carrying Summer into the village.</q><note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender
aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 89 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 156. This
custom has been already referred to.
See p. <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
In many Silesian villages the figure of Death, after
being treated with respect, is stripped of its clothes
and flung with curses into the water, or torn in pieces
in a field. Then a fir-tree adorned with ribbons,
coloured egg-shells, and motley bits of cloth, is carried
through the streets by boys who collect pennies and
sing&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>We have carried Death out,</q></l>
<l>We are bringing the dear Summer back,</l>
<l>The Summer and the May</l>
<l><q rend='post'>And all the flowers gay.</q><note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Das festliche
Jahr</hi>, p. 82; Philo vom Walde,
<hi rend='italic'>Schlesien in Sage und Brauch</hi> (N.D.
preface dated 1883), p. 122.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
At Eisenach on the Fourth Sunday in Lent young
people used to fasten a straw-man, representing Death,
to a wheel, which they trundled to the top of a hill.
Then setting fire to the figure they allowed it and the
wheel to roll downhill. Next they cut a tall fir-tree,
tricked it out with ribbons, and set it up in the plain.
The men then climbed the tree to fetch down the
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
ribbons.<note place='foot'>Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi>, p. 192 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Upper Lusatia the figure of Death, made
of straw and rags, is dressed in a veil furnished by the
last bride and a shirt furnished by the house in which
the last death occurred. Thus arrayed the figure is
stuck on the end of a long pole and carried at full speed
by the tallest and strongest girl, while the rest pelt the
effigy with sticks and stones. Whoever hits it will be
sure to live through the year. In this way Death is
carried out of the village and thrown into the water or
over the boundary of the next village. On their way
home each one breaks a green branch and carries it
gaily with him till he reaches the village, when he
throws it away. Sometimes the young people of the
next village, upon whose land the figure has been
thrown, run after them and hurl it back, not wishing
to have Death among them. Hence the two parties
occasionally come to blows.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii.
643 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; K. Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>Sagenbuch der
Lausitz</hi>, ii. 54 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>,
p. 412 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of
the Russian People</hi>, p. 211.</note>
</p>

<p>
In these cases Death is represented by the puppet
which is thrown away, Summer or Life by the branches
or trees which are brought back. But sometimes a
new potency of life seems to be attributed to the image
of Death itself, and by a kind of resurrection it becomes
the instrument of the general revival. Thus in some
parts of Lusatia women alone are concerned in carrying
out Death, and suffer no male to meddle with it.
Attired in mourning, which they wear the whole day,
they make a puppet of straw, clothe it in a white shirt,
and give it a broom in one hand and a scythe in the
other. Singing songs and pursued by urchins throwing
stones, they carry the puppet to the village boundary,
where they tear it in pieces. Then they cut down
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
a fine tree, hang the shirt on it, and carry it home
singing.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 644; K. Haupt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 55.</note> On the Feast of Ascension the Saxons of a
village near Hermanstadt (Transylvania) observe the
ceremony of <q>carrying out Death</q> in the following
manner. After forenoon church all the school-girls
repair to the house of one of their number, and
there dress up the Death. This is done by tying a
threshed-out corn-sheaf into the rough semblance of a
head and body, while the arms are simulated by a
broomstick stuck horizontally. The figure is dressed
in the Sunday clothes of a village matron. It is then
displayed at the window that all people may see it on
their way to afternoon church. As soon as vespers
are over the girls seize the effigy and, singing a hymn,
carry it in procession round the village. Boys are
excluded from the procession. After the procession
has traversed the village from end to end, the figure is
taken to another house and stripped of its attire; the
naked straw bundle is then thrown out of the window
to the boys, who carry it off and fling it into the
nearest stream. This is the first act of the drama.
In the second, one of the girls is solemnly invested
with the clothes and ornaments previously worn by
the figure of Death, and, like it, is led in procession
round the village to the singing of the same hymns
as before. The ceremony ends with a feast at
the house of the girl who acted the chief part; as
before, the boys are excluded. <q>According to popular
belief, it is allowed to eat fruit only after this day, as
now the <q>Death,</q> that is, the unwholesomeness&mdash;has
been expelled from them. Also the river in which the
Death has been drowned may now be considered fit for
public bathing. If this ceremony be neglected in the
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
village where it is customary, such neglect is supposed
to entail death to one of the young people, or loss of
virtue to a girl.</q><note place='foot'>E. Gerard, <hi rend='italic'>The Land beyond the
Forest</hi>, ii. 47-49.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the first of these two ceremonies the tree which
is brought home after the destruction of the figure of
Death is plainly equivalent to the trees or branches
which, in the preceding customs, were brought back
as representatives of Summer or Life, after Death had
been thrown away or destroyed. But the transference
of the shirt worn by the effigy of Death to the tree
clearly indicates that the tree is a kind of revivification,
in a new form, of the destroyed effigy.<note place='foot'>This is also the view taken of the custom
by Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 419.</note> This
comes out also in the Transylvanian custom; the
dressing of a girl in the clothes worn by the Death, and
the leading her about the village to the same songs
which had been sung when the Death was being carried
about, show that she is intended to be a kind of resuscitation
of the being whose effigy has just been
destroyed. These examples therefore suggest that the
Death whose demolition is represented in these ceremonies
cannot be regarded as the purely destructive
agent which we understand by Death. If the tree
which is brought back as an embodiment of the reviving
vegetation of spring is clothed in the shirt worn by
the Death which has been just destroyed, the object
certainly cannot be to check and counteract the revival
of vegetation; it can only be to foster and promote it.
Therefore the being which has just been destroyed&mdash;the
so-called Death&mdash;must be supposed to be endowed
with a vivifying and quickening influence, which it can
communicate to the vegetable and even the animal
world. This ascription of a life-giving virtue to the
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
figure of Death is put beyond a doubt by the custom,
observed in some places, of taking pieces of the straw
effigy of Death and placing them in the fields to make
the crops grow, or in the manger to make the cattle
thrive. Thus in Spachendorf (Austrian Silesia) the
figure of Death made of straw, brushwood, and rags,
is carried out with wild songs to an open place outside
the village and there burned, and while it is burning a
general struggle takes place for the pieces, which are
pulled out of the flames with bare hands. Each one
who secures a fragment of the effigy ties it to a branch
of the largest tree in his garden, or buries it in his
field, in the belief that this causes the crops to grow
better.<note place='foot'>Vernalecken, <hi rend='italic'>Mythen und Bräuche
des Volkes in Oesterreich</hi>, p. 293 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the Troppau district (Austrian Silesia) the
straw figure which the boys make on the Fourth
Sunday in Lent is dressed by the girls in woman's
clothes and hung with ribbons, necklace, and garlands.
Attached to a long pole it is carried out of the village,
followed by a troop of young people of both sexes,
who alternately frolic, lament, and sing songs. Arrived
at its destination&mdash;a field outside the village&mdash;the
figure is stripped of its clothes and ornaments; then
the crowd rushes on it and tears it to bits, scuffling for
the fragments. Every one tries to get a wisp of the
straw of which the effigy was made, because such a
wisp, placed in the manger, is believed to make the
cattle thrive.<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Das festliche
Jahr</hi>, p. 82.</note> Or the straw is put in the hens' nest,
it being supposed that this prevents the hens from
carrying away their eggs, and makes them brood
much better.<note place='foot'>Philo vom Walde, <hi rend='italic'>Schlesien in
Sage und Brauch</hi>, p. 122.</note> The same attribution of a fertilising
power to the figure of Death appears in the belief that
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
if the bearers of the figure, after throwing it away,
meet cattle and strike them with their sticks, this will
render the cattle prolific.<note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii.
640 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Perhaps the sticks had
been previously used to beat the Death,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>.</note> and so had
acquired the fertilising power ascribed to the effigy.
In Leipzig at Mid-Lent men and women of the
lowest class used to carry through all the streets a
straw effigy of Death, which they exhibited to young
wives, and finally threw into the river, alleging that
this made young wives fruitful, cleansed the city,
and averted the plague and other sickness from the
inhabitants for that year.<note place='foot'>K. Schwenk, <hi rend='italic'>Die Mythologie der
Slawen</hi>, p. 217 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
It seems hardly possible to separate from the
May-trees the trees or branches which are brought
into the village after the destruction of the Death.
The bearers who bring them in profess to be bringing
in the Summer;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>.</note> therefore the trees obviously
represent the Summer; and the doll which is sometimes
attached to the Summer-tree is a duplicate
representative of the Summer, just as the May is
sometimes represented at the same time by a May-tree
and a May Lady.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>.</note> Further, the Summer-trees
are adorned like May-trees with ribbons, etc.;
like May-trees, when large, they are planted in the
ground and climbed up; and like May-trees, when
small, they are carried from door to door by boys or
girls singing songs and collecting money.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, and Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche
Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 644; Reinsberg-Düringsfeld,
<hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender aus Böhmen</hi>,
p. 87 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> And as
if to demonstrate the identity of the two sets of
customs the bearers of the Summer-tree sometimes
announce that they are bringing in the Summer
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
and the May.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>.</note> The customs, therefore, of bringing
in the May and bringing in the Summer are essentially
the same; and the Summer-tree is merely another
form of the May-tree, the only distinction (besides
that of name) being in the time at which they are
respectively brought in; for while the May-tree is
usually fetched in on the 1st of May or at Whitsuntide,
the Summer-tree is fetched in on the Fourth
Sunday in Lent. Therefore, if the explanation here
adopted of the May-tree (namely, that it is an embodiment
of the tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation) is
correct, the Summer-tree must likewise be an embodiment
of the tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation. But
we have seen that the Summer-tree is in some cases
a revivification of the effigy of Death. It follows,
therefore, that in these cases the effigy called Death
must be an embodiment of the tree-spirit or spirit of
vegetation. This inference is confirmed, first, by
the vivifying and fertilising influence which the fragments
of the effigy of Death are believed to exercise
both on vegetable and on animal life;<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> for this influence,
as we saw in the first chapter, is supposed
to be a special attribute of the tree-spirit. It is
confirmed, secondly, by observing that the effigy of
Death is sometimes composed of birchen twigs, of
the branch of a beech-tree, of a threshed-out corn-sheaf,
or of hemp;<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>; and
Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 643.</note> and that sometimes it is hung
on a little tree and so carried about by girls collecting
money,<note place='foot'>Reinsberg-Düringsfeld, <hi rend='italic'>Fest-Kalender
aus Böhmen</hi>, p. 88. Sometimes the
effigy of Death (without a tree) is
carried round by boys who collect
gratuities. Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>D. M.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii. 644.</note> just as is done with the May-tree and
the May Lady, and with the Summer-tree and the
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
doll attached to it. In short we are driven to regard
the expulsion of Death and the bringing in of Summer
as, in some cases at least, merely another form of that
death and resuscitation of the spirit of vegetation
in spring which we saw enacted in the killing and
resurrection of the Wild Man.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>.</note> The burial and
resurrection of the Carnival is probably another way
of expressing the same idea. The burying of the
representative of the Carnival under a dung-heap
is natural, if he is supposed to possess a quickening
and fertilising influence like that ascribed to the
effigy of Death. By the Esthonians, indeed, the straw
figure which is carried out of the village in the usual
way on Shrove Tuesday is not called the Carnival,
but the Wood-spirit (<foreign rend='italic'>Metsik</foreign>), and the identity of it
with the wood-spirit is further shown by fixing it
to the top of a tree in the wood, where it remains
for a year, and is besought almost daily with prayers
and offerings to protect the herds; for like a true
wood-spirit the <foreign rend='italic'>Metsik</foreign> is a patron of cattle. Sometimes
the <foreign rend='italic'>Metsik</foreign> is made of sheafs of corn.<note place='foot'>Wiedemann, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem inneren und
äusseren Leben der Ehsten</hi>, p. 353; Holzmayer,
<q>Osiliana,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandlungen
der gelehrten Estnischen Gesellschaft
zu Dorpat</hi>, vii. Heft 2, p. 10 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 407 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Therefore,
we may fairly conjecture that the names Carnival,
Death, and Summer, are comparatively late and inadequate
expressions for the beings personified or
embodied in the customs described. The very
abstractness of the names bespeaks a modern origin;
the personification of times and seasons like the
Carnival and Summer, or of an abstract notion like
death, is hardly primitive. But the ceremonies themselves
bear the stamp of a dateless antiquity; therefore
we can hardly help supposing that in their origin the
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
ideas which they embodied were of a more simple
and concrete order. The conception of a tree, perhaps
of a particular kind of tree (for some savages have
no word for tree in general), or even of an individual
tree, is sufficiently concrete to supply a basis from
which by a gradual process of generalisation the wider
conception of a spirit of vegetation might be reached.
But this general conception of vegetation would readily
be confounded with the season in which it manifests
itself; hence the substitution of Spring, Summer, or
May for the tree-spirit or spirit of vegetation would
be easy and natural. Again the concrete notion of
the dying tree or dying vegetation would by a similar
process of generalisation glide into a notion of death
in general; so that instead of the carrying out of the
dying or dead vegetation in spring (as a preliminary
to its revival) we should in time get a carrying out
of Death itself. The view that in these spring ceremonies
Death meant originally the dying or dead
vegetation of winter has the high support of W.
Mannhardt; and he confirms it by the analogy of
the name Death as applied to the spirit of the ripe
corn. Commonly the spirit of the ripe corn is conceived,
not as dead, but as old, and hence it goes by
the name of the Old Man or the Old Woman. But
in some places the last sheaf cut at harvest, which is
generally believed to be the seat of the corn spirit,
is called <q>the Dead One;</q> children are warned
against entering the corn-fields because Death sits
in the corn; and, in a game played by Saxon children
in Transylvania at the maize harvest, Death is represented
by a child completely covered with maize
leaves.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, pp. 417-421.</note>
</p>

<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>

<p>
The supposition that behind the conceptions of
Death, Carnival, Summer, etc., as embodied in
these spring ceremonies, there lurk older and more
concrete notions is to a certain extent countenanced
by the fact that in Russia funeral ceremonies like
those of <q>Burying the Carnival</q> and <q>Carrying
out Death</q> are celebrated under the names, not
of Death or the Carnival, but of certain mythic
figures, Kostrubonko, Kostroma, Kupalo, Lada, and
Yarilo. These Russian ceremonies are observed both
in spring and at midsummer. Thus <q rend='pre'>in Little Russia
it used to be the custom at Eastertide to celebrate the
funeral of a being called Kostrubonko, the deity of the
spring. A circle was formed of singers who moved
slowly around a girl who lay on the ground as if dead,
and as they went they sang&mdash;</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='none'><q rend='pre'>Dead, dead is our Kostrubonko!</q></q></l>
<l><q rend='none'><q rend='post'>Dead, dead is our dear one!</q></q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
until the girl suddenly sprang up, on which the chorus
joyfully exclaimed&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='none'><q rend='pre'>Come to life, come to life has our Kostrubonko!</q></q></l>
<l><q rend='post'><q rend='post'>Come to life, come to life has our dear one!</q></q><note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian People</hi>, p. 221.</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
On the Eve of St. John (Midsummer Eve) a figure of
Kupalo is made of straw and <q>is dressed in woman's
clothes, with a necklace and a floral crown. Then
a tree is felled, and, after being decked with ribbons,
is set up on some chosen spot. Near this tree, to
which they give the name of Marena [Winter or
Death], the straw figure is placed, together with a
table, on which stand spirits and viands. Afterwards
a bonfire is lit, and the young men and maidens jump
over it in couples, carrying the figure with them. On
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
the next day they strip the tree and the figure of their
ornaments, and throw them both into a stream.</q><note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 241.</note> On
St. Peter's Day (29th June) or on the following Sunday,
<q>the Funeral of Kostroma</q> or of Lada or of Yarilo is
celebrated in Russia. In the Governments of Penza
and Simbirsk the <q>funeral</q> used to be represented as
follows. A bonfire was kindled on the 28th of June,
and on the next day the maidens chose one of their
number to play the part of Kostroma. Her companions
saluted her with deep obeisances, placed her
on a board, and carried her to the bank of a stream.
There they bathed her in the water, while the oldest
girl made a basket of lime-tree bark and beat it like a
drum. Then they returned to the village and ended
the day with processions, games, and dances.<note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 243 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W.
Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 414.</note> In the
Murom district, Kostroma was represented by a straw
figure dressed in woman's clothes and flowers. This
was laid in a trough and carried with songs to the
bank of a lake or river. Here the crowd divided into
two sides, of which the one attacked and the other
defended the figure. At last the assailants gained the
day, stripped the figure of its dress and ornaments,
tore it in pieces, trod the straw of which it was made
under foot, and flung it into the stream; while the
defenders of the figure hid their faces in their hands
and pretended to bewail the death of Kostroma.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p.
414 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 244.</note> In
the district of Kostroma the burial of Yarilo was
celebrated on the 29th or 30th of June. The people
chose an old man and gave him a small coffin containing
a Priapus-like figure representing Yarilo. This
he carried out of the town, followed by women chanting
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
dirges and expressing by their gestures grief and
despair. In the open fields a grave was dug, and
into it the figure was lowered amid weeping and
wailing, after which games and dances were begun,
<q>calling to mind the funeral games celebrated in old
times by the pagan Slavonians.</q><note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 245; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 416.</note> In Little Russia
the figure of Yarilo was laid in a coffin and carried
through the streets after sunset surrounded by drunken
women, who kept repeating mournfully, <q>He is dead!
he is dead!</q> The men lifted and shook the figure as
if they were trying to recall the dead man to life.
Then they said to the women, <q>Women, weep not.
I know what is sweeter than honey.</q> But the women
continued to lament and chant, as they do at funerals.
<q>Of what was he guilty? He was so good. He will
arise no more. O how shall we part from thee? What
is life without thee? Arise, if only for a brief hour.
But he rises not, he rises not.</q> At last the Yarilo
was buried in a grave.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
These Russian customs are plainly of the same
nature as those which in Austria and Germany are
known as <q>Burying the Carnival</q> and <q>Carrying out
Death.</q> Therefore if my interpretation of the latter
is right, the Russian Kostroma, Yarilo, etc. must also
have been originally embodiments of the spirit of
vegetation, and their death must have been regarded
as a necessary preliminary to their revival. The
revival as a sequel to the death is enacted in the
first of the ceremonies described, the death and
resurrection of Kostrubonko. The reason why in
some of these Russian ceremonies the death of the
spirit of vegetation is celebrated at midsummer may
<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>
be that the decline of summer is dated from Midsummer
Day, after which the days begin to shorten,
and the sun sets out on his downward journey&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l rend='margin-left: 8'><q rend='pre'>To the darksome hollows</q></l>
<l><q rend='post'>Where the frosts of winter lie.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Such a turning-point of the year, when vegetation
might be thought to share the incipient though still
almost imperceptible decay of summer, might very
well be chosen by primitive man as a fit moment for
resorting to those magic ceremonies by which he
hopes to stay the decline, or at least to ensure the
revival, of plant life.
</p>

<p>
But while the death of vegetation appears to have
been represented in all, and its revival in some, of these
spring and midsummer ceremonies, there are features
in some of them which can hardly be explained on
this hypothesis alone. The solemn funeral, the lamentations,
and the mourning attire, which often characterise
these ceremonies, are indeed appropriate at the death
of the beneficent spirit of vegetation. But what shall
we say of the glee with which the effigy is often carried
out, of the sticks and stones with which it is assailed,
and the taunts and curses which are hurled at
it? What shall we say of the dread of the effigy
evinced by the haste with which the bearers scamper
home as soon as they have thrown it away, and by
the belief that some one must soon die in any house
into which it has looked? This dread might perhaps
be explained by a belief that there is a certain
infectiousness in the dead spirit of vegetation which
renders its approach dangerous. But this explanation,
besides being rather strained, does not cover the rejoicings
which often attend the carrying out of Death.
</p>

<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>

<p>
We must therefore recognise two distinct and seemingly
opposite features in these ceremonies; on the
one hand, sorrow for the death, and affection and respect
for the dead; on the other hand, fear and hatred of the
dead, and rejoicings at his death. How the former of
these features is to be explained I have attempted
to show; how the latter came to be so closely associated
with the former is a question which I shall try to answer
in the sequel.
</p>

<p>
Before we quit these European customs to go
farther afield, it will be well to notice that occasionally
the expulsion of Death or of a mythic being is conducted
without any visible representative of the personage
expelled. Thus at Königshain, near Görlitz
(Silesia), all the villagers, young and old, used to go
out with straw torches to the top of a neighbouring
hill, called <foreign rend='italic'>Todtenstein</foreign> (Death-stone), where they lit
their torches, and so returned home singing, <q>We
have driven out Death, we are bringing back
Summer.</q><note place='foot'>Grimm, <hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> ii.
644.</note> In Albania young people light torches of
resinous wood on Easter Eve, and march in procession
through the village brandishing them. At last
they throw the torches into the river, saying, <q>Ha,
Kore, we fling you into the river, like these torches,
that you may return no more.</q> Some say that the
intention of the ceremony is to drive out winter; but
Kore is conceived as a malignant being who devours
children.<note place='foot'>J. G. von Hahn, <hi rend='italic'>Albanesische
Studien</hi>, i. 160.</note>
</p>

<p>
In the Kânagrâ district, India, there is a custom
observed by young girls in spring which closely
resembles some of the European spring ceremonies
just described. It is called the <foreign rend='italic'>Ralî Ka melâ</foreign>, or
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
fair of Rali, the <foreign rend='italic'>Ralî</foreign> being a small painted earthen
image of Siva or Pârvatî. It lasts through most
of Chet (March-April) up to the Sankrânt of Baisâkh
(April), and is in vogue all over the Kânagrâ
district. Its celebration is entirely confined to young
girls. On a morning in March all the young girls
of the village take small baskets of <foreign rend='italic'>dûb</foreign> grass and
flowers to a certain fixed spot, where they throw them
in a heap. Round this heap they stand in a circle and
sing. This goes on every day for ten days, till the
heap of grass and flowers has reached a fair height.
Then they cut in the jungle two branches having three
prongs at one end, and place them, prongs downwards,
over the heap of flowers, so as to make two tripods or
pyramids. On the single uppermost points of these
branches they get an image-maker to construct two
clay images, one to represent Siva, and the other
Pârvatî. The girls then divide themselves into two
parties, one for Siva and one for Pârvatî, and marry
the images in the usual way, leaving out no part of the
ceremony. After the marriage they have a feast, the
cost of which is defrayed by contributions solicited
from their parents. Then at the next Sankrânt
(Baisâkh) they all go together to the riverside, throw
the images into a deep pool, and weep over the place,
as though they were performing funeral obsequies.
The boys of the neighbourhood often annoy them by
diving after the images, bringing them up, and waving
them about while the girls are crying over them. The
object of the fair is said to be to secure a good
husband.<note place='foot'>Captain R. C. Temple, in <hi rend='italic'>Indian Antiquary</hi>, xi. (1882) p. 297 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
That in this Indian ceremony the deities Siva and
Pârvatî are conceived as spirits of vegetation seems to
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
be proved by the fact that their images are placed on
branches over a heap of grass and flowers. Here, as
often in European folk-custom, the divinities of vegetation
are represented in duplicate, by plants and by
puppets. The marriage of these Indian deities in
spring corresponds to the European ceremonies in
which the marriage of the vernal spirits of vegetation
is represented by the King and Queen of May, the
May Bride, Bridegroom of the May, etc.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> The throwing
of the images into the water, and the mourning for
them, are the equivalents of the European customs of
throwing the dead spirit of vegetation (under the name
of Death, Yarilo, Kostroma, etc.) into the water and
lamenting over it. Again, in India, as often in
Europe, the rite is performed exclusively by females.
The notion that the ceremony was effective for procuring
husbands to the girls can be explained by the
quickening and fertilising influence which the spirit of
vegetation is believed to exert upon human and
animal, as well as upon vegetable life.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='4. Adonis.'/>
<head>§ 4.&mdash;Adonis.</head>

<p>
But it is in Egypt and Western Asia that the
death and resurrection of vegetation appear to have
been most widely celebrated with ceremonies like those
of modern Europe. Under the names of Osiris,
Adonis, Thammuz, Attis, and Dionysus, the Egyptians,
Syrians, Babylonians, Phrygians, and Greeks
represented the decay and revival of vegetation with
rites which, as the ancients themselves recognised,
<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>
were substantially the same, and which find their
parallels in the spring and midsummer customs of our
European peasantry. The nature and worship of these
deities have been discussed at length by many learned
writers; all that I propose to do is to sketch those
salient features in their ritual and legends which seem
to establish the view here taken of their nature. We
begin with Adonis or Thammuz.
</p>

<p>
The worship of Adonis was practised by the
Semitic peoples of Syria, from whom it was borrowed
by the Greeks as early at least as the fifth century
before Christ. The name Adonis is the Phoenician
<foreign rend='italic'>Adon</foreign>, <q>lord.</q><note place='foot'>Baudissin, <hi rend='italic'>Studien zur semitischen
Religionsgeschichte</hi>, i. 299; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>, p.
274.</note> He was said to have been a fair
youth, beloved by Aphrodite (the Semitic Astarte),
but slain by a boar in his youthful prime. His death
was annually lamented with a bitter wailing, chiefly
by women; images of him, dressed to resemble
corpses, were carried out as to burial and then thrown
into the sea or into springs;<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Alcibiades</hi>, 18; Zenobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Centur.</hi> i. 49; Theocritus, xv. 132 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Eustathius on Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi> xi. 590.</note> and in some places his
revival was celebrated on the following day.<note place='foot'>Besides Lucian (cited below) see
Jerome, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in Ezechiel.</hi> viii.
14, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in qua (solemnitate) plangitur
quasi mortuus, et postea reviviscens,
canitur atque laudatur ... interfectionem
et resurrectionem Adonidis
planctu et gaudio prosequens</foreign>.</note> But
the ceremonies varied somewhat both in the manner
and the season of their celebration in different places.
At Alexandria images of Adonis and Aphrodite were
displayed on two couches; beside them were set ripe
fruits of all kinds, cakes, plants growing in flower pots,
and green bowers twined with anise. The marriage
of the lovers was celebrated one day, and on the next
the image of Adonis was borne by women attired as
mourners, with streaming hair and bared breasts, to
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
the sea-shore and committed to the waves.<note place='foot'>Theocritus, xv.</note> The
date at which this Alexandrian ceremony was observed
is not expressly stated; but from the mention of the
ripe fruits it has been inferred that it took place in
late summer.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 277.</note> At Byblus the death of Adonis was
annually mourned with weeping, wailing, and beating
of the breast; but next day he was believed to come
to life again and ascend up to heaven in the presence
of his worshippers.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>De dea Syria</hi>, 6. The
words ἐς τὸν ἠέρα πέμπουσι imply that
the ascension was supposed to take place
in the presence, if not before the eyes,
of the worshipping crowds.</note> This celebration appears to have
taken place in spring; for its date was determined by
the discoloration of the river Adonis, and this has
been observed by modern travellers to occur in spring.
At that season the red earth washed down from the
mountains by the rain tinges the water of the river
and even the sea for a great way with a blood-red
hue, and the crimson stain was believed to be the
blood of Adonis, annually wounded to death by the
boar on Mount Lebanon.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> 8. The discoloration
of the river and the sea was
observed by Maundrell on 17/27th March
1696/1697. See his <q>Journey from Aleppo
to Jerusalem,</q> in Bohn's <hi rend='italic'>Early Travels
in Palestine</hi>, edited by Thomas Wright,
p. 411. Renan observed the discoloration
at the beginning of February;
Baudissin, <hi rend='italic'>Studien</hi>, i. 298 (referring to
Renan, <hi rend='italic'>Mission de Phénicie</hi>, p. 283).
Milton's lines will occur to most readers.</note> Again, the red anemone<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> x. 735, compared
with Bion i. 66. The latter, however,
makes the anemone spring from the tears,
as the rose from the blood of Adonis.</note>
was said to have sprung from the blood of Adonis;
and as the anemone blooms in Syria about Easter, this
is a fresh proof that the festival of Adonis, or at least
one of his festivals, was celebrated in spring. The
name of the flower is probably derived from Naaman
(<q>darling</q>), which seems to have been an epithet of
Adonis. The Arabs still call the anemone <q>wounds
of the Naaman.</q><note place='foot'>W. Robertson Smith, <q>Ctesias and
the Semíramis legend,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>English
Historical Review</hi>, April 1887, following
Lagarde.</note>
</p>

<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>

<p>
The resemblance of these ceremonies to the Indian
and European ceremonies previously described is
obvious. In particular, apart from the somewhat
doubtful date of its celebration, the Alexandrian ceremony
is almost identical with the Indian. In both
of them the marriage of two divinities, whose connection
with vegetation seems indicated by the fresh
plants with which they are surrounded, is celebrated
in effigy, and the effigies are afterwards mourned over
and thrown into the water.<note place='foot'>In the Alexandrian ceremony, however,
it appears to have been the image
of Adonis only which was thrown into
the sea.</note> From the similarity of
these customs to each other and to the spring and midsummer
customs of modern Europe we should naturally
expect that they all admit of a common explanation.
Hence, if the explanation here adopted of the latter
is correct, the ceremony of the death and resurrection
of Adonis must also have been a representation of
the decay and revival of vegetation. The inference
thus based on the similarity of the customs is confirmed
by the following features in the legend and
ritual of Adonis. His connection with vegetation
comes out at once in the common story of his birth.
He was said to have been born from a myrrh-tree,
the bark of which bursting, after a ten months' gestation,
allowed the lovely infant to come forth. According
to some, a boar rent the bark with his tusk and
so opened a passage for the babe. A faint rationalistic
colour was given to the legend by saying that
his mother was a woman named Myrrh, who had
been turned into a myrrh-tree soon after she had
conceived the child.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, <hi rend='italic'>Biblioth.</hi> iii. 14, 4;
Schol. on Theocritus, i. 109; Antoninus
Liberalis, 34; Tzetzes on Lycophron,
829; Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> x. 489 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> v. 72, and on
<hi rend='italic'>Bucol.</hi> x. 18; Hyginus, <hi rend='italic'>Fab.</hi> 58, 164;
Fulgentius, iii. 8. The word Myrrha
or Smyrna is borrowed from the
Phoenician (Liddell and Scott, <hi rend='italic'>Greek
Lexicon</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> σμύρνα). Hence the
mother's name, as well as the son's,
was taken directly from the Semites.</note> Again the story that Adonis
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
spent half, or according to others a third, of the
year in the lower world and the rest of it in the
upper world,<note place='foot'>Schol. on Theocritus, iii. 48;
Hyginus, <hi rend='italic'>Astronom.</hi> ii. 7; Lucian,
<hi rend='italic'>Dialog. deor.</hi> xi. 1; Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>De
natura deorum</hi>, 28, p. 163 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> ed.
Osannus; Apollodorus, iii. 14, 4.</note> is explained most simply and naturally
by supposing that he represented vegetation,
especially the corn, which lies buried in the earth
half the year and reappears above ground the
other half. Certainly of the annual phenomena of
nature there is none which suggests so obviously
the idea of a yearly death and resurrection as the
disappearance and reappearance of vegetation in
autumn and spring. Adonis has been taken for the
sun; but there is nothing in the sun's annual course
within the temperate and tropical zones to suggest
that he is dead for half or a third of the year and
alive for the other half or two-thirds. He might,
indeed, be conceived as weakened in winter,<note place='foot'>Thus, after the autumnal equinox
the Egyptians celebrated the <q>nativity
of the sun's walking-sticks,</q> because, as
the sun declined daily in the sky, and his
heat and light diminished, he was supposed
to need a staff with which to support
his steps. Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 52.</note> but
dead he could not be thought to be; his daily reappearance
contradicts the supposition. Within the
arctic circle, where the sun annually disappears for a
continuous period of from twenty-four hours to six
months, according to the latitude, his annual death
and resurrection would certainly be an obvious idea;
but no one has suggested that the Adonis worship
came from those regions. On the other hand the
annual death and revival of vegetation is a conception
which readily presents itself to men in every stage of
savagery and civilisation; and the vastness of the
scale on which this yearly decay and regeneration
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
takes place, together with man's intimate dependence
on it for subsistence, combine to render it the
most striking annual phenomenon in nature, at least
within the temperate zones. It is no wonder that a
phenomenon so important, so striking, and so universal
should, by suggesting similar ideas, have given rise
to similar rites in many lands. We may, therefore,
accept as probable an explanation of the Adonis worship
which accords so well with the facts of nature
and with the analogy of similar rites in other lands,
and which besides is countenanced by a considerable
body of opinion amongst the ancients themselves.<note place='foot'>Schol. on Theocritus, iii. 48,
ὁ Ἄδωνις, ἤγουν ὁ σῖτος ὁ σπειρόμενος,
ἒξ μῆνας ἐν τῇ γῇ ποιεῖ ἀπὸ τῆς σπορᾶς,
καὶ ἒξ μῆνας ἔχει αὐτὸν ἡ Ἀφροδίτη,
τουτέστιν ἡ εὐκρασία τοῦ ἀέρος. καὶ
ἐκτότε λαμβάνουσιν αὐτὸν οἱ ἄνθρωποι.
Jerome on Ezech. c. viii. 14. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Eadem
gentilitas hujuscemodi fabulas poetarum,
quae habent turpitudinem, interpretatur
subtiliter interfectionem et resurrectionem
Adonidis planctu et gaudio prosequens:
quorum alterum in seminibus, quae
moriuntur in terra, alterum in segetibus,
quibus mortua semina renascuntur,
ostendi putat.</foreign> Ammianus Marcellinus,
xix. 1, 11, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in sollemnibus
Adonidis sacris, quod simulacrum
aliquod esse frugum adultarum religiones
mysticae docent</foreign>. Id. xxii. 9, 15, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>amato
Veneris, ut fabulae fingunt, apri dente
ferali deleto, quod in adulto flore sectarum
est indicium frugum</foreign>. Clemens
Alexandr. <hi rend='italic'>Hom.</hi> 6, 11 (quoted by
W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, p. 281), λάμβανουσι δὲ καὶ
Ἄδωνιν εἰς ὡραίους καρπούς. Etymolog.
Magn. Ἄδωνις κύριον; δύναται καὶ ὁ
καρπὸς εἶναι ἄδωνις; οἷον ἀδώνειος καρπός,
ἀρέσκων. Eusebius, <hi rend='italic'>Praepar. Evang.</hi>
iii. 11, 9, Ἄδωνις τῆς τῶν τελείων
καρπῶν ἐκτομῆς σύμβολον.</note>
</p>

<p>
The character of Thammuz or Adonis as a corn-spirit
comes out plainly in an account of his festival
given by an Arabic writer of the tenth century.
In describing the rites and sacrifices observed at the
different seasons of the year by the heathen Syrians of
Harran, he says:&mdash;<q>Thammuz (July). In the middle
of this month is the festival of el-Bûgât, that is, of the
weeping women, and this is the Tâ-uz festival, which
is celebrated in honour of the god Tâ-uz. The women
bewail him, because his lord slew him so cruelly,
ground his bones in a mill, and then scattered them to
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
the wind. The women (during this festival) eat
nothing which has been ground in a mill, but limit
their diet to steeped wheat, sweet vetches, dates,
raisins, and the like.</q><note place='foot'>D. Chwolsohn, <hi rend='italic'>Die Ssabier und
der Ssabismus</hi>, ii. 27; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ueber
Tammûz und die Menschenverehrung
bei den alten Babyloniern</hi>, p. 38.</note> Thammuz (of which Tâ-uz is
only another form of pronunciation) is here like Burns's
John Barleycorn&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>They wasted, o'er a scorching flame,</q></l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'>The marrow of his bones;</l>
<l>But a miller us'd him worst of all,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 4'><q rend='post'>For he crush'd him between two stones.</q><note place='foot'>The comparison is due to Felix
Liebrecht (<hi rend='italic'>Zur Volkskunde</hi>, p. 259).</note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
But perhaps the best proof that Adonis was a
deity of vegetation is furnished by the gardens of
Adonis, as they were called. These were baskets or
pots filled with earth, in which wheat, barley, lettuces,
fennel, and various kinds of flowers were sown and
tended for eight days, chiefly or exclusively by women.
Fostered by the sun's heat, the plants shot up rapidly,
but having no root withered as rapidly away, and at
the end of eight days were carried out with the images
of the dead Adonis, and flung with them into the sea
or into springs.<note place='foot'>For the authorities see W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>, p.
279, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi> 2, and p. 280, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi> 2; to
which add Diogenianus, i. 14; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>De sera num. vind.</hi> 17. Women
only are mentioned as planting the
gardens of Adonis by Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>;
Julian, <hi rend='italic'>Convivium</hi>, p. 329 ed. Spanheim
(p. 423 ed. Hertlein); Eustathius
on Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi> xi. 590. On the other
hand Diogenianus, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> says φυτεύοντες
ἢ φυτεύουσαι.</note> At Athens these ceremonies were
observed at midsummer. For we know that the fleet
which Athens fitted out against Syracuse, and by the destruction
of which her power was permanently crippled,
sailed at midsummer, and by an ominous coincidence
the sombre rites of Adonis were being celebrated at
the very time. As the troops marched down to the
harbour to embark, the streets through which they
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
passed were lined with coffins and corpse-like effigies,
and the air was rent with the noise of women wailing
for the dead Adonis. The circumstance cast a gloom
over the sailing of the most splendid armament that
Athens ever sent to sea.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Alcibiades</hi>, 18; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nicias</hi>,
13. The date of the sailing of the fleet
is given by Thucydides, vi. 30, θέρους
μεσοῦντος ἤδη.</note>
</p>

<p>
These gardens of Adonis are most naturally interpreted
as representatives of Adonis or manifestations
of his power; they represented him, true to his original
nature, in vegetable form, while the images of
him, with which they were carried out and cast into
the water, represented him in his later anthropomorphic
form. All these Adonis ceremonies, if I
am right, were originally intended as charms to
promote the growth and revival of vegetation; and
the principle by which they were supposed to produce
this effect was sympathetic magic. As was
explained in the first chapter, primitive people suppose
that by representing or mimicking the effect which
they desire to produce they actually help to produce
it; thus by sprinkling water they make rain, by lighting
a fire they make sunshine, and so on. Similarly
by mimicking the growth of crops, they hope to insure
a good harvest. The rapid growth of the wheat
and barley in the gardens of Adonis was intended
to make the corn shoot up; and the throwing of
the gardens and of the images into the water was
a charm to secure a due supply of fertilising rain.<note place='foot'>In hot southern countries like
Egypt and the Semitic regions of
Western Asia, where vegetation depends
chiefly or entirely upon irrigation, the
purpose of the charm is doubtless to
secure a plentiful flow of water in the
streams. But as the ultimate object
and the charms for securing it are the
same in both cases, it has not been
thought necessary always to point out
the distinction.</note>
The same, I take it, was the object of throwing the
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
effigies of Death and the Carnival into water in the
corresponding ceremonies of modern Europe. We
have seen that the custom of drenching a leaf-clad
person (who undoubtedly personifies vegetation) with
water is still resorted to in Europe for the express
purpose of producing rain.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>.</note> Similarly the custom of
throwing water on the last corn cut at harvest, or on
the person who brings it home (a custom observed in
Germany and France, and till quite lately in England
and Scotland), is in some places practised with the
avowed intent to procure rain for the next year's crops.
Thus in Wallachia and amongst the Roumanians of
Transylvania, when a girl is bringing home a crown
made of the last ears of corn cut at harvest, all who
meet her hasten to throw water on her, and two farm-servants
are placed at the door for the purpose; for they
believe that if this were not done, the crops next year
would perish from drought.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p.
214; W. Schmidt, <hi rend='italic'>Das Jahr und seine
Tage in Meinung und Brauch der
Romänen Siebenbürgens</hi>, p. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> So amongst the Saxons
of Transylvania, the person who wears the wreath made
of the last corn cut (sometimes the reaper who cut the
last corn also wears the wreath) is drenched with water
to the skin; for the wetter he is the better will be next
year's harvest, and the more grain there will be threshed
out.<note place='foot'>G. A. Heinrich, <hi rend='italic'>Agrarische Sitten
und Gebräuche unter den Sachsen
Siebenbürgens</hi> (Hermanstadt, 1880),
p. 24; Wsissocki, <hi rend='italic'>Sitten und Brauch
der Siebenbürger Sachsen</hi> (Hamburg,
1888), p. 32.</note> At the spring ploughing in Prussia, when the
ploughmen and sowers returned in the evening from
their work in the fields, the farmer's wife and the servants
used to splash water over them. The ploughmen
and sowers retorted by seizing every one, throwing them
into the pond, and ducking them under the water. The
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
farmer's wife might claim exemption on payment of
a forfeit; but every one else had to be ducked. By
observing this custom they hoped to ensure a due
supply of rain for the seed.<note place='foot'>Matthäus Praetorius, <hi rend='italic'>Deliciae Prussicae</hi>,
55; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>,
p. 214 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> Also after harvest in
Prussia, the person who wore a wreath made of the
last corn cut was drenched with water, while a prayer
was uttered that <q>as the corn had sprung up and
multiplied through the water, so it might spring up and
multiply in the barn and granary.</q><note place='foot'>Praetorius, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>, 60; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 215, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note> In a Babylonian
legend, the goddess Istar (Astarte, Aphrodite) descends
to Hades to fetch the water of life with which
to restore to life the dead Thammuz, and it appears
that the water was thrown over him at a great mourning
ceremony, at which men and women stood round
the funeral pyre of Thammuz lamenting.<note place='foot'>A. H. Sayce, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the
ancient Babylonians</hi> (Hibbert Lectures,
1887), p. 221 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike
Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>, p. 275.</note> This
legend, as Mannhardt points out, is probably a mythical
explanation of a Babylonian festival resembling
the Syrian festival of Adonis. At this festival, which
doubtless took place in the month Thammuz (June-July)<note place='foot'>According to Jerome (on Ezechiel,
viii. 14), Thammuz was June; but
according to modern scholars the month
corresponded rather to July, or to part of
June and part of July. Movers, <hi rend='italic'>Die
Phoenizier</hi>, i. 210; Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi>
p. 275. My friend, Prof. W. Robertson
Smith, informs me that owing to the
variations of the local Syrian calendars
the month Thammuz fell in different
places at different times, from midsummer
to autumn, or from June to
September.</note>
and therefore about midsummer, the dead Thammuz
was probably represented in effigy, water was
poured over him, and he came to life again. This
Babylonian legend is, therefore, of importance, since
it confirms the view that the purpose for which
the images and gardens of Adonis were thrown into
the water was to effect the resurrection of the god, that
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
is, to secure the revival of vegetation. The connection
of Thammuz with vegetation is proved by a fragment
of a Babylonian hymn, in which Thammuz is described
as dwelling in the midst of a great tree at the centre of
the earth.<note place='foot'>A. H. Sayce, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 238.</note>
</p>

<p>
The opinion that the gardens of Adonis are
essentially charms to promote the growth of vegetation,
especially of the crops, and that they belong
to the same class of customs as those spring and
midsummer folk-customs of modern Europe which
have been described, does not rest for its evidence
merely on the intrinsic probability of the case.
Fortunately, we are able to show that gardens of
Adonis (if we may use the expression in a general
sense) are still planted, first, by a primitive race at
their sowing season, and, second, by European
peasants at midsummer. Amongst the Oraons and
Mundas of Bengal, when the time comes for planting
out the rice which has been grown in seed-beds, a
party of young people of both sexes go to the forest
and cut a young Karma tree, or the branch of one.
Bearing it in triumph they return dancing, singing,
and beating drums, and plant it in the middle of the
village dancing-ground. A sacrifice is offered to the
tree; and next morning the youth of both sexes,
linked arm-in-arm, dance in a great circle round the
Karma tree, which is decked with strips of coloured
cloth and sham bracelets and necklets of plaited straw.
As a preparation for the festival, the daughters of the
head-man of the village cultivate blades of barley in a
peculiar way. The seed is sown in moist, sandy soil,
mixed with turmeric, and the blades sprout and unfold
of a pale yellow or primrose colour. On the day of
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
the festival the girls take up these blades and carry
them in baskets to the dancing-ground, where, prostrating
themselves reverentially, they place some of
the plants before the Karma tree. Finally, the Karma
tree is taken away and thrown into a stream or
tank.<note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of Bengal</hi>, p. 259.</note> The meaning of planting these barley blades
and then presenting them to the Karma tree is hardly
open to question. We have seen that trees are
supposed to exercise a quickening influence upon the
growth of crops, and that amongst the very people in
question&mdash;the Mundas or Mundaris&mdash;<q>the grove
deities are held responsible for the crops.</q><note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>.</note> Therefore,
when at the season for planting out the rice the
Mundas bring in a tree and treat it with so much
respect, their object can only be to foster thereby the
growth of the rice which is about to be planted out;
and the custom of causing barley blades to sprout
rapidly and then presenting them to the tree must
be intended to subserve the same purpose, perhaps
by reminding the tree-spirit of his duty towards the
crops, and stimulating his activity by this visible
example of rapid vegetable growth. The throwing of
the Karma tree into the water is to be interpreted
as a rain-charm. Whether the barley blades are
also thrown into the water is not said; but, if my
interpretation of the custom is right, probably they
are so. A distinction between this Bengal custom
and the Greek rites of Adonis is that in the former the
tree-spirit appears in his original form as a tree;
whereas in the Adonis worship he appears in anthropomorphic
form, represented as a dead man, though
his vegetable nature is indicated by the gardens of
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
Adonis, which are, so to say, a secondary manifestation
of his original power as a tree-spirit.
</p>

<p>
In Sardinia the gardens of Adonis are still planted
in connection with the great midsummer festival which
bears the name of St. John. At the end of March
or on the 1st of April a young man of the village
presents himself to a girl and asks her to be his <foreign rend='italic'>comare</foreign>
(gossip or sweetheart), offering to be her <foreign rend='italic'>compare</foreign>.
The invitation is considered as an honour by the girl's
family, and is gladly accepted. At the end of May
the girl makes a pot of the bark of the cork-tree, fills it
with earth, and sows a handful of wheat and barley in it.
The pot being placed in the sun and often watered, the
corn sprouts rapidly and has a good head by Midsummer
Eve (St. John's Eve, 23d June). The pot is
then called <foreign rend='italic'>Erme</foreign> or <foreign rend='italic'>Nenneri</foreign>. On St. John's Day the
young man and the girl, dressed in their best,
accompanied by a long retinue and preceded by
children gambolling and frolicking, move in procession
to a church outside the village. Here they break the
pot by throwing it against the door of the church.
Then they sit down in a ring on the grass and eat
eggs and herbs to the music of flutes. Wine is mixed
in a cup and passed round, each one drinking as it
passes. Then they join hands and sing <q>Sweethearts
of St. John</q> (<foreign rend='italic'>Compare e comare di San Giovanni</foreign>)
over and over again, the flutes playing the while.
When they tire of singing, they stand up and dance
gaily in a ring till evening. This is the general
Sardinian custom. As practised at Ozieri it has some
special features. In May the pots are made of cork-bark
and planted with corn, as already described.
Then on the Eve of St. John the window-sills are
draped with rich cloths, on which the pots are placed,
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
adorned with crimson and blue silk and ribbons of
various colours. On each of the pots they used
formerly to place a statuette or cloth doll dressed as
a woman, or a Priapus-like figure made of paste; but
this custom, rigorously forbidden by the Church, has
fallen into disuse. The village swains go about in
a troop to look at the pots and their decorations and
to wait for the girls, who assemble on the public square
to celebrate the festival. Here a great bonfire is
kindled, round which they dance and make merry.
Those who wish to be <q>Sweethearts of St. John</q> act
as follows. The young man stands on one side of the
bonfire and the girl on the other, and they, in a
manner, join hands by each grasping one end of a long
stick, which they pass three times backwards and
forwards across the fire, thus thrusting their hands
thrice rapidly into the flames. This seals their
relationship to each other. Dancing and music go
on till late at night.<note place='foot'>Antonio Bresciani, <hi rend='italic'>Dei costumi dell'
isola di Sardegna comparati cogli
antichissimi popoli orientali</hi> (Rome and
Turin, 1866), p. 427 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; R. Tennant,
<hi rend='italic'>Sardinia and its Resources</hi> (Rome and
London, 1885), p. 187; S. Gabriele,
<q>Usi dei contadini della Sardegna,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Archivio per lo studio delle tradizioni
popolari</hi>, vii. (1888) p. 469 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Tennant
says that the pots are kept in a dark
warm place, and that the children leap
across the fire.</note> The correspondence of these
Sardinian pots of grain to the gardens of Adonis seems
complete, and the images formerly placed in them
answer to the images of Adonis which accompanied
his gardens.
</p>

<p>
This Sardinian custom is one of those midsummer
customs, once celebrated in many parts of Europe,
a chief feature of which is the great bonfire round
which people dance and over which they leap.
Examples of these customs have already been cited
from Sweden and Bohemia.<note place='foot'>See ch. i. p. 78 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> These examples sufficiently
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
prove the connection of the midsummer bonfire
with vegetation; for both in Sweden and Bohemia an
essential part of the festival is the raising of a May-pole
or Midsummer-tree, which in Bohemia is burned
in the bonfire. Again, in the Russian midsummer
ceremony cited above,<note place='foot'>P. <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>.</note> the straw figure of Kupalo,
the representative of vegetation, is placed beside a
May-pole or Midsummer-tree and then carried to
and fro across a bonfire. Kupalo is here represented
in duplicate, in tree-form by the Midsummer-tree,
and in anthropomorphic form by the straw effigy, just
as Adonis was represented both by an image and a
garden of Adonis; and the duplicate representatives
of Kupalo, like those of Adonis, are finally cast into
water. In the Sardinian custom the Gossips or
Sweethearts of St. John probably correspond to the
Lord and Lady or King and Queen of May. In the
province of Blekinge (Sweden), part of the midsummer
festival is the election of a Midsummer Bride, who
chooses her bridegroom; a collection is made for the
pair, who for the time being are looked upon as man
and wife.<note place='foot'>L. Lloyd, <hi rend='italic'>Peasant Life in Sweden</hi>, p. 257.</note> Such Midsummer pairs are probably, like
the May pairs, representatives of the spirit of vegetation
in its reproductive capacity; they represent in
flesh and blood what the images of Siva and Pârvatî
in the Indian ceremony, and the images of Adonis and
Aphrodite in the Alexandrian ceremony, represented
in effigy. The reason why ceremonies whose aim is
to foster the growth of vegetation should thus be
associated with bonfires; why in particular the representative
of vegetation should be burned in tree-form
or passed across the fire in effigy or in the form
of a living couple, will be explained later on. Here
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
it is enough to have proved the fact of such association
and therefore to have obviated the objection which
might have been raised to my interpretation of the
Sardinian custom, on the ground that the bonfires
have nothing to do with vegetation. One more piece
of evidence may here be given to prove the contrary.
In some parts of Germany young men and girls leap
over midsummer bonfires for the express purpose of
making the hemp or flax grow tall.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 464; Leoprechting, <hi rend='italic'>Aus dem Lechrain</hi>, p. 183.</note> We may, therefore,
assume that in the Sardinian custom the blades
of wheat and barley which are forced on in pots for the
midsummer festival, and which correspond so closely
to the gardens of Adonis, form one of those widely-spread
midsummer ceremonies, the original object of
which was to promote the growth of vegetation, and
especially of the crops. But as, by an easy extension
of ideas, the spirit of vegetation was believed to exercise
a beneficent influence over human as well as animal
life, the gardens of Adonis would be supposed, like
the May-trees or May-boughs, to bring good luck to
the family or to the individual who planted them;
and even after the idea had been abandoned that they
operated actively to bring good luck, omens might still
be drawn from them as to the good or bad fortune
of families or individuals. It is thus that magic
dwindles into divination. Accordingly we find modes
of divination practised at midsummer which resemble
more or less closely the gardens of Adonis. Thus an
anonymous Italian writer of the sixteenth century has
recorded that it was customary to sow barley and
wheat a few days before the festival of St. John
(Midsummer Day) and also before that of St. Vitus;
and it was believed that the person for whom they were
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
sown would be fortunate and get a good husband or a
good wife, if the grain sprouted well; but if they
sprouted ill, he or she would be unlucky.<note place='foot'>G. Pitrè, <hi rend='italic'>Spettacoli e feste popolari
siciliane</hi>, p. 296 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In various
parts of Italy and all over Sicily it is still customary to
put plants in water or in earth on the Eve of St. John,
and from the manner in which they are found to be
blooming or fading on St. John's Day omens are
drawn, especially as to fortune in love. Amongst
the plants used for this purpose are <hi rend='italic'>Ciuri di S.
Giuvanni</hi> (St. John's wort?) and nettles.<note place='foot'>G. Pitrè, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 302 sq.; Antonio
de Nino, <hi rend='italic'>Usi Abruzzesi</hi>, i. 55 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Gubernatis,
<hi rend='italic'>Usi Nuziali</hi>, p. 39 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Cp. <hi rend='italic'>Archivio
per lo studio delle tradizioni popolari</hi>,
i. 135. At Smyrna a blossom of the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>agnus castus</foreign> is used on St. John's Day
for a similar purpose, but the mode in
which the omens are drawn is somewhat
different, <hi rend='italic'>Archivio per lo studio delle
tradizioni popolari</hi>, vii. (1888) p. 128 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Prussia
two hundred years ago the farmers used to send
out their servants, especially their maids, to gather
St. John's wort on Midsummer Eve or Midsummer
Day (St. John's Day). When they had fetched
it, the farmer took as many plants as there were
persons and stuck them in the wall or between the
beams; and it was thought that the person whose
plant did not bloom would soon fall sick or die. The
rest of the plants were tied in a bundle, fastened to the
end of a pole, and set up at the gate or wherever the
corn would be brought in at the next harvest. This
bundle was called <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Kupole</foreign>; the ceremony was known
as Kupole's festival; and at it the farmer prayed for
a good crop of hay, etc.<note place='foot'>Matthäus Praetorius, <hi rend='italic'>Deliciae Prussicae</hi>,
herausgegeben von Dr. W. Pierson
(Berlin, 1871), p. 56.</note> This Prussian custom is
particularly notable, inasmuch as it strongly confirms
the opinion expressed above that Kupalo (doubtless
identical with Kupole) was originally a deity of vegetation.<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
For here Kupalo is represented by a bundle
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
of plants specially associated with midsummer in
folk-custom; and her influence over vegetation is
plainly signified by placing her plant-formed representative
over the place where the harvest is brought
in, as well as by the prayers for a good crop which
are uttered on the occasion. A fresh argument is
thus supplied in support of the conclusion that the
Death, whose analogy to Kupalo, Yarilo, etc., has
been shown, was originally a personification of vegetation,
more especially of vegetation as dying or dead in
winter. Further, my interpretation of the gardens of
Adonis is confirmed by finding that in this Prussian
custom the very same kind of plants are used to form
the gardens of Adonis (as we may call them) and
the image of the deity. Nothing could set in a
stronger light the truth of the view that the gardens
of Adonis are merely another manifestation of the
god himself.
</p>

<p>
The last example of the gardens of Adonis which
I shall cite is the following. At the approach
of Easter, Sicilian women sow wheat, lentils, and
canary-seed in plates, which are kept in the dark and
watered every two days. The plants soon shoot up;
the stalks are tied together with red ribbons, and the
plates containing them are placed on the sepulchres
which, with effigies of the dead Christ, are made up
in Roman Catholic and Greek churches on Good
Friday,<note place='foot'>G. Pitrè, <hi rend='italic'>Spettacoli e feste popolari
siciliane</hi>, p. 211. A similar custom
is observed at Cosenza in Calabria.
Vincenzo Dorsa, <hi rend='italic'>La tradizione greco-latina</hi>,
etc., p. 50. For the Easter
ceremonies in the Greek Church, see
R. A. Arnold, <hi rend='italic'>From the Levant</hi> (London,
1868), i. 251 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> just as the gardens of Adonis were placed on
the grave of the dead Adonis.<note place='foot'>κήπους ὡσίουν ἐπιταφίους Ἀδώνιδι,
Eustathius on Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi> xi. 590.</note> The whole custom&mdash;sepulchres
as well as plates of sprouting grain&mdash;is
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
probably nothing but a continuation, under a different
name, of the Adonis worship.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='5. Attis.'/>
<head>§ 5.&mdash;Attis.</head>

<p>
The next of those gods, whose supposed death and
resurrection struck such deep roots into the religious
faith and ritual of Western Asia, is Attis. He was to
Phrygia what Adonis was to Syria. Like Adonis, he
appears to have been a god of vegetation, and his
death and resurrection were annually mourned and
rejoiced over at a festival in spring. The legends and
rites of the two gods were so much alike that the
ancients themselves sometimes identified them.<note place='foot'>Hippolytus, <hi rend='italic'>Refut. omn. haeres.</hi>
v. 9, p. 168, ed. Duncker and
Schneidewin; Socrates, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. Eccles.</hi>
iii. 23, §§ 51 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> p. 204.</note> Attis
was said to have been a fair youth who was beloved
by the great Phrygian goddess Cybele. Two different
accounts of his death were current. According to the
one, he was killed by a boar, like Adonis. According
to the other, he mutilated himself under a pine-tree,
and died from the effusion of blood. The latter is said
to have been the local story told by the people of
Pessinus, a great centre of Cybele worship, and the
whole legend of which it forms a part is stamped with
a character of rudeness and savagery that speaks
strongly for its antiquity.<note place='foot'>That Attis was killed by a boar
was stated by Hermesianax, an elegiac
poet of the fourth century <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> (Pausanias,
vii. 17); cp. Schol. on Nicander, <hi rend='italic'>Alex.</hi>
8. The other story is told by Arnobius
(<hi rend='italic'>Adversus nationes</hi>, v. 5 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>) on
the authority of Timotheus, an otherwise
unknown writer, who professed to
derive it <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex reconditis antiquitatum
libris et ex intimis mysteriis</foreign>. It is
obviously identical with the account
which Pausanias mentions (<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>) as the
story current in Pessinus.</note> But the genuineness of
the other story seems also vouched for by the fact
that his worshippers, especially the people of Pessinus,
<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>
abstained from eating swine.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, vii. 17; Julian, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi>
v. 177 B.</note> After his death
Attis is said to have been changed into a pine-tree.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> x. 103 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
The ceremonies observed at his festival are
not very fully known, but their general order appears
to have been as follows.<note place='foot'>On the festival see especially Marquardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Römische Staatsverwaltung</hi>, iii.<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi>
370 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Daremberg et Saglio,
<hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire des Antiquités grecques
et romaines</hi>, i. p. 1685 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> (article
<q>Cybèle</q>); W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Antike
Wald- und Feldkulte</hi>, p. 291 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 572 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> At the spring equinox
(22d March) a pine-tree was cut in the woods and
brought into the sanctuary of Cybele, where it was
treated as a divinity. It was adorned with woollen
bands and wreaths of violets, for violets were said to
have sprung from the blood of Attis, as anemones
from the blood of Adonis; and the effigy of a young
man was attached to the middle of the tree.<note place='foot'>Julian, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> v. 168 c; Joannes
Lydus, <hi rend='italic'>De mensibus</hi>, iv. 41; Arnobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Advers. nationes</hi>, v. cc. 7, 16 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Firmicus
Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore profan.
relig.</hi> 27.</note> On
the second day (23d March) the chief ceremony
seems to have been a blowing of trumpets.<note place='foot'>Julian, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> and 169 C.</note> The
third day (24th March) was known as the Day of
Blood: the high priest drew blood from his arms
and presented it as an offering.<note place='foot'>Trebellius Pollio, <hi rend='italic'>Claudius</hi>, 4;
Tertullian, <hi rend='italic'>Apologet</hi>. 25. For other
references, see Marquardt, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> It was perhaps
on this day or night that the mourning for Attis took
place over an effigy, which was afterwards solemnly
buried.<note place='foot'>Diodorus, iii. 59; Firmicus
Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De err. profan. relig.</hi> 3;
Arnobius, <hi rend='italic'>Advers. nat.</hi> v. 16; Schol.
on Nicander, <hi rend='italic'>Alex.</hi> 8; Servius on
Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> ix. 116; Arrian, <hi rend='italic'>Tactica</hi>,
33. The ceremony described in Firmicus
Maternus, c. 22 (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>nocte quadam
simulacrum in lectica supinum ponitur
et per numeros digestis fletibus plangitur....
Idolum sepelis. Idolum
plangis</foreign>, etc.), may very well be the
mourning and funeral rites of Attis, to
which he had more briefly referred in
c. 3.</note> The fourth day (25th March) was the
Festival of Joy (<foreign rend='italic'>Hilaria</foreign>), at which the resurrection of
Attis was probably celebrated&mdash;at least the celebration
of his resurrection seems to have followed closely upon
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
that of his death.<note place='foot'><p>On the <foreign rend='italic'>Hilaria</foreign> see Macrobius,
<hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 21, 10; Julian, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> v.
168 D, 169 D; Damascius, <hi rend='italic'>Vita
Isidori</hi>, in Photius, p. 345 A 5 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> ed.
Bekker. On the resurrection, see
Firmicus Maternus, 3, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>reginae suae
amorem [Phryges] cum luctibus annuis
consecrarunt, et ut satis iratae mulieri
facerent aut ut paenitenti solacium
quaererent, quem paulo ante sepelierant
revixisse jactarunt.... Mortem ipsius</foreign>
[<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> of Attis] <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>dicunt, quod semina
collecta conduntur, vitam rursus quod
jacta semina annuis vicibus † reconduntur</foreign>
[<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>renascuntur</foreign>, C. Halm]. Again
cp. id. 22, <hi rend='italic'>Idolum sepelis</hi>. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Idolum
plangis, idolum de sepultura proferis, et
miser cum haec feceris gaudes</foreign>; and
Damascius, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> τὴν τῶν ἱλαρίων καλουμένην
ἐορτήν; ὅπερ ἑδήλου τὴν ἑξ ἄδου
γεγονυῖαν ἡμῶν σωτερίαν. This last
passage, compared with the formula in
Firmicus Maternus, c. 22
</p>
<p>θαρρεῖτε μύσται τοῦ θεοῦ σεσωμένου;<lb/>
ἔσται γὰρ ἠμῖν ἐκ πόνων σωτηρία,
</p>
<p>
makes it probable that the ceremony
described by Firmicus, c. 22, is the
resurrection of Attis.</p></note> The Roman festival closed on
27th March with a procession to the brook Almo, in
which the bullock-cart of the goddess, her image, and
other sacred objects were bathed. But this bath of the
goddess is known to have also formed part of her
festival in her Asiatic home. On returning from the
water the cart and oxen were strewn with fresh spring
flowers.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fast.</hi> iv. 337 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Ammianus
Marcellinus, xxiii. 3. For other
references see Marquardt and Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>ll. cc.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The original character of Attis as a tree-spirit is
brought out plainly by the part which the pine-tree
plays in his legend and ritual. The story that he was
a human being transformed into a pine-tree is only one
of those transparent attempts at rationalising the old
beliefs which meet us so frequently in mythology.
His tree origin is further attested by the story that he
was born of a virgin, who conceived by putting in her
bosom a ripe almond or pomegranate.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, vii. 17; Arnobius, <hi rend='italic'>Adv.
nationes</hi>, v. 6.; cp. Hippolytus, <hi rend='italic'>Refut.
omn. haeres.</hi> v. 9, pp. 166, 168.</note> The bringing in
of the pine-tree from the wood, decked with violets
and woollen bands, corresponds to bringing in the
May-tree or Summer-tree in modern folk-custom;
and the effigy which was attached to the pine-tree was
only a duplicate representative of the tree-spirit or
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
Attis. At what point of the ceremonies the violets
and the effigy were attached to the tree is not said,
but we should assume this to be done after the
mimic death and burial of Attis. The fastening of his
effigy to the tree would then be a representation of
his coming to life again in tree-form, just as the
placing of the shirt of the effigy of Death upon a
tree represents the revival of the spirit of vegetation in
a new form.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> After being attached to the tree, the
effigy was kept for a year and then burned.<note place='foot'>Firmicus Maternus, 27.</note> We have
seen that this was apparently sometimes done with the
May-pole;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>.</note> and we shall see presently that the effigy
of the corn-spirit, made at harvest, is often preserved
till it is replaced by a new effigy at next year's harvest.
The original intention of thus preserving the effigy for
a year and then replacing it by a new one was
doubtless to maintain the spirit of vegetation in fresh
and vigorous life. The bathing of the image of
Cybele was probably a rain-charm, like the throwing
of the effigies of Death and of Adonis into the
water. Like tree-spirits in general, Attis appears to
have been conceived as exercising power over the
growth of corn, or even to have been identified with the
corn. One of his epithets was <q>very fruitful;</q> he was
addressed as the <q>reaped green (or yellow) ear of corn,</q>
and the story of his sufferings, death, and resurrection
was interpreted as the ripe grain wounded by the
reaper, buried in the granary, and coming to life again
when sown in the ground.<note place='foot'>Hippolytus, <hi rend='italic'>Ref. omn. haeres.</hi> v.
cc. 8, 9, pp. 162, 168; Firmicus
Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore prof. relig.</hi> 3.</note> His worshippers abstained
from eating seeds and the roots of vegetables,<note place='foot'>Julian, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> v. 174 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi> <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>.</note> just
as at the Adonis ceremonies women abstained from
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
eating corn ground in a mill. Such acts would
probably have been esteemed a sacrilegious partaking
of the life or of the bruised and broken body of the
god.
</p>

<p>
From inscriptions it appears that both at Pessinus
and Rome the high priest of Cybele was regularly
called Attis.<note place='foot'>Duncker, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Alterthums</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>5</hi>
i. 456, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi> 4; Roscher,
<hi rend='italic'>Ausführliches Lexikon d. griech. u.
röm. Mythologie</hi>, i. c. 724. Cp.
Polybius, xxii. 20 (18).</note> It is therefore a reasonable conjecture
that the high priest played the part of the legendary
Attis at the annual festival.<note place='foot'>The conjecture is that of Henzen
in <hi rend='italic'>Annal. d. Inst.</hi> 1856, p. 110,
referred to in Roscher, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> We have seen that on
the Day of Blood he drew blood from his arms, and
this may have been an imitation of the self-inflicted
death of Attis under the pine-tree. It is not inconsistent
with this supposition that Attis was also represented
at these ceremonies by an effigy; for we have
already had cases in which the divine being is first
represented by a living person and afterwards by an
effigy, which is then burned or otherwise destroyed.<note place='foot'>See pp. <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg231'>231</ref>.</note>
Perhaps we may go a step farther and conjecture that
this mimic killing of the priest (if it was such), accompanied
by a real effusion of his blood, was in Phrygia,
as it has been elsewhere, a substitute for a human
sacrifice which in earlier times was actually offered.
Professor W. M. Ramsay, whose authority on all
questions relating to Phrygia no one will dispute, is of
opinion that at these Phrygian ceremonies <q>the representative
of the god was probably slain each year by a
cruel death, just as the god himself died.</q><note place='foot'>Article <q>Phrygia,</q> in <hi rend='italic'>Encyclopaedia
Britannica</hi>, ninth ed. xviii. 853.</note> We know
from Strabo<note place='foot'>xii. 5, 3.</note> that the priests of Pessinus were at one
time potentates as well as priests; they may, therefore,
<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>
have belonged to that class of divine kings or
popes whose duty it was to die each year for their
people and the world. As a god of vegetation,
annually slain, the representative of Attis would be
parallel to the Wild Man, the King, etc., of north
European folk-custom, and to the Italian priest of
Nemi.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='6. Osiris.'/>
<head>§ 6.&mdash;Osiris.</head>

<p>
There seem to be some grounds for believing that
Osiris, the great god of ancient Egypt, was one of
those personifications of vegetation, whose annual
death and resurrection have been celebrated in so
many lands. But as the chief of the gods he appears
to have absorbed the attributes of other deities, so that
his character and rites present a complex of heterogeneous
elements which, with the scanty evidence at
our disposal, it is hardly possible to sort out. It may
be worth while, however, to put together some of the
facts which lend support to the view that Osiris
or at least one of the deities out of whom he was
compounded was a god of vegetation, analogous to
Adonis and Attis.
</p>

<p>
The outline of his myth is as follows.<note place='foot'>The myth, in a connected form, is
only known from Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et
Osiris</hi>, cc. 13-19. Some additional
details, recovered from Egyptian sources,
will be found in the work of Adolf
Erman, <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches Leben
im Altertum</hi>, p. 365 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Osiris was
the son of the earth-god Qeb (or Seb, as the name is
sometimes transliterated).<note place='foot'>Le Page Renouf, <hi rend='italic'>Hibbert Lectures</hi>,
1879, p. 110; Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und
Mythologie der alten Aegypter</hi>, p.
614; Ad. Erman, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte
des Altertums</hi>, i. § 56 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Reigning as a king on earth,
he reclaimed the Egyptians from savagery, gave them
<pb n='302'/><anchor id='Pg302'/>
laws, and taught them to worship the gods. Before his
time the Egyptians had been cannibals. But Isis, the
sister and wife of Osiris, discovered wheat and barley
growing wild, and Osiris introduced the cultivation of
these grains amongst his people, who forthwith abandoned
cannibalism and took kindly to a corn diet.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 13; Diodorus, i. 14; Tibullus, i. 7, 29 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
Afterwards Osiris travelled over the world diffusing
the blessings of civilisation wherever he went. But on
his return his brother Set (whom the Greeks called
Typhon), with seventy-two others, plotted against him,
and having inveigled him into a beautifully decorated
coffer, they nailed it down on him, soldered it fast
with molten lead, and flung it into the Nile. It floated
down to the sea. This happened on the 17th day of
the month Athyr. Isis put on mourning, and wandered
disconsolately up and down seeking the body, till at last
she found it at Byblus, on the Syrian coast, whither it
had drifted with the waves. An <foreign rend='italic'>erica</foreign> tree had shot up
and enfolded the coffer within its stem, and the King
of Byblus, admiring the fine growth of the tree, had
caused it to be cut down and converted into a pillar of
his palace. From him Isis obtained leave to open the
trunk of the tree, and having taken out the coffer, she
carried it away with her. But she left it to visit her
son Horus at Butus in the Delta, and Typhon found
the coffer as he was hunting a boar by the light of a
full moon.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 8.</note> He recognised the body of Osiris, rent it
into fourteen pieces, and scattered them abroad. Isis
sailed up and down the marshes in a papyrus boat
seeking the fragments, and as she found each she
buried it. Hence many graves of Osiris were shown
in Egypt. Others said that Isis left an effigy of Osiris
<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>
in every city, pretending it was his body, in order that
Osiris might be worshipped in many places, and to
prevent Typhon from discovering the real corpse.
Afterwards her son Horus fought against Typhon,
conquered him, and bound him fast. But Isis, to
whom he had been delivered, loosed his bonds and let
him go. This angered Horus, and he pulled the
crown from his mother's head; but Hermes replaced
it with a helmet made in the shape of a cow's head.
Typhon was subsequently defeated in two other battles.
The rest of the myth included the dismemberment of
Horus and the beheading of Isis.
</p>

<p>
So much for the myth of Osiris. Of the annual
rites with which his death and burial were celebrated
we unfortunately know very little. The mourning
lasted five days,<note place='foot'>So Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 617. Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> 39, says four days, beginning
with the 17th of the month Athyr.</note> from the 8th to the 12th of the
month Athyr.<note place='foot'>In the Alexandrian year the month
Athyr corresponded to November.
But as the old Egyptian year was
vague, that is, made no use of intercalation,
the astronomical date of each
festival varied from year to year, till it
had passed through the whole cycle of
the astronomical year. From the fact,
therefore, that, when the calendar became
fixed, Athyr fell in November,
no inference can be drawn as to the
date at which the death of Osiris was
originally celebrated. It is thus perfectly
possible that it may have been
originally a harvest festival, though the
Egyptian harvest falls, not in November,
but in April; cp. Selden, <hi rend='italic'>De diis Syris</hi>,
p. 335 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Parthey on Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et
Osiris</hi>, c. 39.</note> The ceremonies began with the
<q>earth-ploughing,</q> that is, with the opening of the
field labours, when the waters of the Nile are sinking.
The other rites included the search for the
mangled body of Osiris, the rejoicings at its discovery,
and its solemn burial. The burial took place
on the 11th of November, and was accompanied
by the recitation of lamentations from the liturgical
books. These lamentations, of which several copies
have been discovered in modern times, were put in the
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
mouth of Isis and Nephthys, sisters of Osiris. <q>In
form and substance,</q> says Brugsch, <q>they vividly
recall the dirges chanted at the Adonis' rites over the
dead god.</q><note place='foot'>Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> For a specimen of
these lamentations see Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
p. 631 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Records of the Past</hi>, ii. 119
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> For the annual ceremonies of
finding and burying Osiris, see also
Firmicus Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore profanarum
religionum</hi>, 2 § 3; Servius
on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iv. 609.</note> Next day was the joyous festival of
Sokari, that being the name under which the hawk-headed
Osiris of Memphis was invoked. The solemn
processions of priests which on this day wound round
the temples with all the pomp of banners, images, and
sacred emblems, were amongst the most stately
pageants that ancient Egypt could show. The whole
festival ended on the 16th of November with a special
rite called the erection of the <foreign rend='italic'>Tatu</foreign>, <foreign rend='italic'>Tat</foreign>, or <foreign rend='italic'>Ded</foreign> pillar.<note place='foot'>Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 617 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Erman,
<hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches Leben im
Altertum</hi>, p. 377 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
This pillar appears from the monuments to have been
a column with cross bars at the top, like the yards of a
mast, or more exactly like the superposed capitals of a
pillar.<note place='foot'>Erman, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Manners
and Customs of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>
(London, 1878), iii. 68, 82; Tiele,
<hi rend='italic'>History of the Egyptian Religion</hi>, p. 46.</note> On a Theban tomb the king himself, assisted
by his relations and a priest, is represented hauling at
the ropes by which the pillar is being raised. The
pillar was interpreted, at least in later Egyptian
theology, as the backbone of Osiris. It might very
well be a conventional representation of a tree stripped
of its leaves; and if Osiris was a tree-spirit, the bare
trunk and branches of a tree might naturally be
described as his backbone. The erection of the
column would then be, as Erman interprets it, a representation
of the resurrection of Osiris, which, as we
learn from Plutarch, appears to have been celebrated
at his mysteries.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35. ὁμολογεῖ
δὲ καὶ τὰ τιτανικὰ καὶ νὺξ τελεία
τοῖς λεγομένοις Ὀσίριδος διασπασμοῖς καὶ
ταῖς ἀναβιώσεσι καὶ παλιγγενεσίαις,
ὁμοίως δὲ καὶ τὰ περὶ τὰς ταφάς.</note> Perhaps the ceremony which
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
Plutarch describes as taking place on the third day of
the festival (the 19th day of the month Athyr) may
also have referred to the resurrection. He says that
on that day the priests carried the sacred ark down to
the sea. Within the ark was a golden casket, into
which drinking-water was poured. A shout then went
up that Osiris was found. Then some mould was
mixed with water, and out of the paste thus formed a
crescent-shaped image was fashioned, which was then
dressed in robes and adorned.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 39.</note>
</p>

<p>
The general similarity of the myth and ritual of
Osiris to those of Adonis and Attis is obvious. In all
three cases we see a god whose untimely and violent
death is mourned by a loving goddess and annually
celebrated by their worshippers. The character of
Osiris as a deity of vegetation is brought out by the
legend that he was the first to teach men the use of
corn, and by the fact that his annual festival began
with ploughing the earth. He is said also to have
introduced the cultivation of the vine.<note place='foot'>Tibullus, i. 7, 33 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In one of
the chambers dedicated to Osiris in the great temple
of Isis at Philae the dead body of Osiris is represented
with stalks of corn springing from it, and a
priest is watering the stalks from a pitcher which he
holds in his hand. The accompanying inscription sets
forth that <q>This is the form of him whom one may
not name, Osiris of the mysteries, who springs from
the returning waters.</q><note place='foot'>Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 621.</note> It would seem impossible to
devise a more graphic way of representing Osiris as
a personification of the corn; while the inscription
proves that this personification was the kernel of the
<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>
mysteries of the god, the innermost secret that was
only revealed to the initiated. In estimating the
mythical character of Osiris very great weight must
be given to this monument. The legend that his
mangled remains were scattered up and down the
land may be a mythical way of expressing either the
sowing or the winnowing of the grain. The latter
interpretation is supported by the story that Isis placed
the severed limbs of Osiris on a corn-sieve.<note place='foot'>Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> i. 166.</note> Or the
legend may be a reminiscence of the custom of slaying
a human victim (probably considered as a representative
of the corn-spirit) and distributing his flesh or
scattering his ashes over the fields to fertilise them.
We have already seen that in modern Europe the
figure of <q>Death</q> is sometimes torn in pieces, and that
the fragments are then buried in the fields to make
the crops grow well.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>.</note> Later on we shall meet with
examples of human victims being treated in the same
way. With regard to the ancient Egyptians, we have
it on the authority of Manetho that they used to burn
red-haired men and scatter their ashes with winnowing-fans.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 73, cp. 33;
Diodorus, i. 88.</note>
That this custom was not, as might perhaps
have been supposed, a mere way of wreaking their
spite on foreigners, amongst whom rather than
amongst the native Egyptians red-haired people
would generally be found, appears from the fact that
the oxen which were sacrificed had also to be red; a
single black or white hair found on a beast would have
disqualified it for the sacrifice.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> 31; Herodotus,
ii. 38.</note> The red hair of the
human victims was thus probably essential; the fact
that they were generally foreigners was only accidental.
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
If, as I conjecture, these human sacrifices were
intended to promote the growth of the crops&mdash;and
the <emph>winnowing</emph> of their ashes seems to support this
view&mdash;red-haired victims were perhaps selected as
best fitted to represent the spirit of the golden grain.
For when a god is represented by a living person, it
is natural that the human representative should be
chosen on the ground of his supposed resemblance to
the god. Hence the ancient Mexicans, conceiving
the maize as a personal being who went through the
whole course of life between seed-time and harvest,
sacrificed new-born babes when the maize was sown,
older children when it had sprouted, and so on till it
was fully ripe, when they sacrificed old men.<note place='foot'>Herrera, quoted by Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Culturländer
des alten Amerika</hi>, ii. 639.</note> A name
for Osiris was the <q>crop</q> or <q>harvest</q>;<note place='foot'>Lefébure, <hi rend='italic'>Le mythe Osirien</hi> (Paris,
1874-75), p. 188.</note> and the
ancients sometimes explained him as a personification
of the corn.<note place='foot'>Firmicus Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore
profanarum religionum</hi>, 2, § 6, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>defensores
eorum volunt addere physicam
rationem, frugum semina Osirim dicentes
esse; Isim terram, Tyfonem calorem:
et quia maturatae fruges calore ad vitam
hominum colliguntur et divisae a terrae
consortia separantur et rursus adpropinquante
hieme seminantur, hanc
volunt esse mortem Osiridis, cum fruges
recondunt, inventionem vero, cum fruges
genitali terrae fomento conceptae annua
rursus coeperint procreatione generari</foreign>;
Eusebius, <hi rend='italic'>Praepar. Evang.</hi> iii. 11, 31,
ὁ δὲ Ὄσιρις παρ᾽ Αἰγυπτίος τὴν κάρπιμον
παρίστησι δύναμιν, ἤν θρήνοις ἀπομειλίσσονται
εἰς γῆν ἀφανιζομένην ἐν τῷ σπόρῳ.
καὶ ὑφ᾽ ἡμῶν καταναλισκομένην εὶς τὰς
τροφάς.</note>
</p>

<p>
But Osiris was not only a corn-spirit; he was also
a tree-spirit, and this was probably his original character;
for, as we have already observed, the corn-spirit
seems to be only an extension of the older tree-spirit.
His character as a tree-spirit was represented very
graphically in a ceremony described by Firmicus
Maternus.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Op. cit.</hi> 27, § 1.</note> A pine-tree was cut down, the centre
was hollowed out, and with the wood thus excavated
an image of Osiris was made, which was then <q>buried</q>
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
in the hollow of the tree. Here, again, it is hard to
imagine how the conception of a tree as tenanted by a
personal being could be more plainly expressed. The
image of Osiris thus made was kept for a year and
then burned, exactly as was done with the image of
Attis which was attached to the pine-tree. The
ceremony of cutting the tree, as described by Firmicus
Maternus, appears to be alluded to by Plutarch.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 21, αινῶ δὲ τομὴν
ξύλου καὶ σχίσιν λίνου καὶ χοὰς χεομένας.
διὰ τὸ πολλὰ τῶν μυστικῶν ἀναμεμῖχθαι
τούτοις. Again, c. 42, τὸ δὲ ξύλον ἐν
ταῖς λεγομέναις; Ὀσίριδος ταφαῖς τέμνοντες
κατασκευάζουσι λάρνακα μηνοειδὴ.</note> It
was probably the ritual counterpart of the mythical
discovery of the body of Osiris enclosed in the <foreign rend='italic'>erica</foreign>
tree. We may conjecture that the erection of the
<foreign rend='italic'>Tatu</foreign> pillar at the close of the annual festival of Osiris<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg304'>304</ref>.</note>
was identical with the ceremony described by Firmicus;
it is to be noted that in the myth the <foreign rend='italic'>erica</foreign> tree formed
a pillar in the King's house. Like the similar custom
of cutting a pine-tree and fastening an image to it in
the rites of Attis, the ceremony perhaps belonged to
that class of customs of which the bringing in the
May-pole is among the most familiar. As to the
pine-tree in particular, at Denderah the tree of Osiris
is a conifer, and the coffer containing the body of
Osiris is here represented as enclosed within the tree.<note place='foot'>Lefébure, <hi rend='italic'>Le mythe Osirien</hi>, pp.
194, 198, referring to Mariette, <hi rend='italic'>Denderah</hi>,
iv. 66 and 72.</note>
A pine-cone is often represented on the monuments as
offered to Osiris, and a MS. of the Louvre speaks of
the cedar as sprung from Osiris.<note place='foot'>Lefébure, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> pp. 195, 197.</note> The sycamore and
the tamarisk are also his trees. In inscriptions he is
spoken of as residing in them;<note place='foot'>Birch, in Wilkinson's <hi rend='italic'>Manners and
Customs of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>
(London, 1878), iii. 84.</note> and his mother Nut is
frequently represented in a sycamore.<note place='foot'>Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 63 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Ed.
Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Alterthums</hi>, i. §§
56, 60.</note> In a sepulchre
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
at How (Diospolis Parva) a tamarisk is represented
overshadowing the coffer of Osiris; and in the series
of sculptures which represent the mystic history of
Osiris in the great temple of Isis at Philae, a tamarisk
is depicted with two men pouring water on it. The
inscription on this last monument leaves no doubt,
says Brugsch, that the verdure of the earth is believed
to be connected with the verdure of the tree, and that
the sculpture refers to the grave of Osiris at Philae, of
which Plutarch says that it was overshadowed by a
<foreign rend='italic'>methide</foreign> plant, taller than any olive-tree. This sculpture,
it may be observed, occurs in the same chamber
in which Osiris is represented as a corpse with ears of
corn sprouting from him.<note place='foot'>Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> iii. 349 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und Mythologie der
alten Aegypter</hi>, p. 621; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et
Osiris</hi>, 20. In Plutarch <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi> Parthey
proposes to read μυρίκης for μηθίδης,
and this conjecture appears to be
accepted by Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> In inscriptions Osiris is
referred to as <q>the one in the tree,</q> <q>the solitary one
in the acacia,</q> etc.<note place='foot'>Lefébure, <hi rend='italic'>Le mythe Osirien</hi>, p. 191.</note> On the monuments he sometimes
appears as a mummy covered with a tree or with
plants.<note place='foot'>Lefébure, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 188.</note> It accords with the character of Osiris as a
tree-spirit that his worshippers were forbidden to injure
fruit-trees, and with his character as a god of vegetation
in general that they were not allowed to stop up
wells of water, which are so important for purposes of
irrigation in hot southern lands.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35. One
of the points in which the myths of
Isis and Demeter agree, is that both
goddesses in their search for the loved
and lost one are said to have sat down,
sad at heart and weary, on the edge of
a well. Hence those who had been
initiated at Eleusis were forbidden to
sit on a well. Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>,
15; Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Demeter</hi>,
98 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Pausanias, i. 39, 1; Apollodorus,
i. 5, 1; Nicander, <hi rend='italic'>Theriaca</hi>,
486; Clemens Alex., <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. 20.</note>
</p>

<p>
The original meaning of the goddess Isis is still
more difficult to determine than that of her brother
and husband Osiris. Her attributes and epithets were
so numerous that in the hieroglyphics she is called
<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>
<q>the many-named,</q> <q>the thousand-named,</q> and in
Greek inscriptions <q>the myriad-named.</q><note place='foot'>Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Religion und Mythologie
der alten Aegypter</hi>, p. 645.</note> Tiele confesses
candidly that <q>it is now impossible to tell
precisely to what natural phenomena the character
of Isis at first referred.</q><note place='foot'>C. P. Tiele, <hi rend='italic'>History of Egyptian
Religion</hi>, p. 57.</note> Mr. Renouf states that Isis
was the Dawn,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hibbert Lectures</hi>, 1879, p. 111.</note> but without assigning any reason
whatever for the identification. There are at least
some grounds for seeing in her a goddess of corn.
According to Diodorus, whose authority appears to
have been the Egyptian historian Manetho, the discovery
of wheat and barley was attributed to Isis, and
at her festivals stalks of these grains were carried in
procession to commemorate the boon she had conferred
on men. Further, at harvest-time, when the Egyptian
reapers had cut the first stalks, they laid them down
and beat their breasts, lamenting and calling upon
Isis.<note place='foot'>Diodorus, i. 14. Eusebius (<hi rend='italic'>Praeparat.
Evang.</hi> iii. 3) quotes from
Diodorus (i. 11-13) a long passage on
the early religion of Egypt, prefacing
the quotation (c. 2) with the remark
γράφει δὲ καὶ τὰ περὶ τούτων πλατύτερον
μὲν ὁ Μανέθως, ἐπετετμημένως δὲ ὁ
Διόδωρος, which seems to imply that
Diodorus epitomised Manetho.</note> Amongst the epithets by which she is designated
on the inscriptions are <q>creatress of the green crop,</q>
<q>the green one, whose greenness is like the greenness
of the earth,</q> and <q>mistress of bread.</q><note place='foot'>Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 647.</note> According to
Brugsch she is <q>not only the creatress of the fresh verdure
of vegetation which covers the earth, but is actually
the green corn-field itself, which is personified as a
goddess.</q><note place='foot'>Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 649.</note> This is confirmed by her epithet <foreign rend='italic'>Sochit</foreign> or
<foreign rend='italic'>Sochet</foreign>, meaning <q>a corn-field,</q> a sense which the word
still retains in Coptic.<note place='foot'>Brugsch,<hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> It is in this character of a
corn-goddess that the Greeks conceived Isis, for they
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
identified her with Demeter.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 59, 156; Diodorus,
i. 13, 25, 96; Apollodorus, ii.
1, 3; Tzetzes, <hi rend='italic'>Schol. in Lycophron.</hi> 212.</note> In a Greek epigram
she is described as <q>she who has given birth to the
fruits of the earth,</q> and <q>the mother of the ears of
corn,</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Antholog. Planud.</hi> 264, 1.</note> and in a hymn composed in her honour she
speaks of herself as <q>queen of the wheat-field,</q> and is
described as <q>charged with the care of the fruitful
furrow's wheat-rich path.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>, ed. Abel, p. 295 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Osiris has been sometimes interpreted as the sun-god;
and this view has been held by so many
distinguished writers in modern times that a few
words of reply seem called for. If we inquire on
what evidence Osiris has been identified with the sun
or the sun-god, it will be found on examination that
the evidence is minute in quantity and dubious, where
it is not absolutely worthless, in quality. The diligent
Jablonski, the first modern scholar to collect and examine
the testimony of classical writers on Egyptian
religion, says that it can be shown in many ways that
Osiris is the sun, and that he could produce a cloud of
witnesses to prove it, but that it is needless to do so,
since no learned man is ignorant of the fact.<note place='foot'>Jablonski, <hi rend='italic'>Pantheon Aegyptiorum</hi>
(Frankfurt, 1750), i. 125 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Of the
writers whom he condescends to quote, the only two
who expressly identify Osiris with the sun are Diodorus
and Macrobius. The passage in Diodorus runs thus:<note place='foot'>i. 11.</note>
<q>It is said that the aboriginal inhabitants of Egypt,
looking up to the sky, and smitten with awe and wonder
at the nature of the universe, supposed that there were
two gods, eternal and primeval, the sun and the moon,
of whom they named the sun Osiris and the moon
Isis.</q> Even if Diodorus's authority for this statement
is Manetho, as there is some ground for believing,<note place='foot'>See p. <ref target='Pg310'>310</ref>, <hi rend='italic'>note</hi>.</note>
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
little or no weight can be attached to it. For it is
plainly a philosophical, and therefore a late, explanation
of the first beginnings of Egyptian religion,
reminding us of Kant's familiar saying about the starry
heavens and the moral law rather than of the rude
traditions of a primitive people. Jablonski's second
authority, Macrobius, is no better but rather worse.
For Macrobius was the father of that large family of
mythologists who resolve all or most gods into the
sun. According to him Mercury was the sun, Mars
was the sun, Janus was the sun, Saturn was the sun,
so was Jupiter, also Nemesis, likewise Pan, etc.<note place='foot'>See the <hi rend='italic'>Saturnalia</hi>, bk. i.</note> It
was, therefore, nearly a matter of course that he should
identify Osiris with the sun.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> i. 21, 11.</note> But apart from the
general principle, so frankly enunciated by Professor
Maspero, that all the gods are the sun (<q><foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Comme tous
les dieux, Osiris est le soleil</foreign></q>),<note place='foot'>Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne des
peuples de l'Orient</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> (Paris, 1886), p.
35.</note> Macrobius has not
much cause to show for identifying Osiris in particular
with the sun. He argues that Osiris must be the sun
because an eye was one of his symbols. The premise
is correct,<note place='foot'>Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs
of the Ancient Egyptians</hi> (London,
1878), iii. 353.</note> but what exactly it has to do with the conclusion
is not clear. The opinion that Osiris was the
sun is also mentioned, but not accepted, by Plutarch,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 52.</note>
and it is referred to by Firmicus Maternus.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>De errore profan. religionum</hi>, 8.</note>
</p>

<p>
Amongst modern Egyptologists, Lepsius, in identifying
Osiris with the sun, appears to rely mainly on the
passage of Diodorus already quoted. But the monuments,
he adds, also show <q>that down to a late time
Osiris was sometimes conceived as <foreign rend='italic'>Ra</foreign>. In this quality
he is named <foreign rend='italic'>Osiris-Ra</foreign> even in the <q>Book of the Dead,</q>
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
and Isis is often called <q>the royal consort of Ra.</q></q><note place='foot'>Lepsius, <q>Ueber den ersten
aegyptischen Götterkreis und seine
geschichtlich-mythologische Entstehung,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Abhandlungen der königlichen
Akademie der Wissenschaften zu
Berlin</hi>, 1851, p. 194 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
That Ra was both the physical sun and the sun-god is
of course undisputed; but with every deference for the
authority of so great a scholar as Lepsius, it may be
doubted whether such identification can be taken as
evidence of the original character of Osiris. For the
religion of ancient Egypt<note place='foot'>The view here taken of the history
of Egyptian religion is based on the
sketch in Erman's <hi rend='italic'>Aegypten und aegyptisches
Leben im Altertum</hi>, p. 351
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> may be described as a confederacy
of local cults which, while maintaining against
each other a certain measure of jealous and even hostile
independence, were yet constantly subjected to the
fusing and amalgamating action of political centralisation
and philosophical reflection. The history of the
religion appears to have largely consisted of a struggle
between these opposite forces or tendencies. On the
one side there was the conservative tendency to preserve
the local cults with all their distinctive features,
fresh, sharp, and crisp, as they had been handed down
from an immemorial past. On the other side there
was the progressive tendency, favoured by the gradual
fusion of the people under a powerful central government,
first to dull the edge of these provincial distinctions,
and finally to break them down completely and
merge them in a single national religion. The conservative
party probably mustered in its ranks the
great bulk of the people, their prejudices and affections
being warmly enlisted in favour of the local deity,
with whose temple and rites they had been familiar
from childhood; and the popular aversion to change,
based on the endearing effect of old association, must
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
have been strongly reinforced by the less disinterested
opposition of the local clergy, whose material interests
would necessarily suffer with any decay of their shrines.
On the other hand the kings, whose power and glory
rose with the political and ecclesiastical consolidation
of the nation, were the natural champions of religious
unity; and their efforts would be seconded by the
cultured and reflecting minority, who could hardly fail
to be shocked by the many barbarous and revolting
elements in the local rites. As usual in such cases,
the process of religious unification appears to have
been largely effected by discovering points of similarity,
real or imaginary, between various local gods, which
were thereupon declared to be only different names or
manifestations of the same god.
</p>

<p>
Of the deities who thus acted as centres of attraction,
absorbing in themselves a multitude of minor
divinities, by far the most important was the sun-god Ra.
There appear to have been few gods in Egypt who were
not at one time or other identified with him. Ammon
of Thebes, Horus of the East, Horus of Edfu, Chnum
of Elephantine, Atum of Heliopolis, all were regarded
as one god, the sun. Even the water-god Sobk, in spite
of his crocodile shape, did not escape the same fate.
Indeed one king, Amenhôtep IV, undertook to sweep
away all the old gods at a stroke and replace them by
a single god, the <q>great living disc of the sun.</q><note place='foot'>On this attempted revolution in
religion see Lepsius in <hi rend='italic'>Verhandl. d.
königl. Akad. d. Wissensch. zu Berlin</hi>,
1851, pp. 196-201; Erman, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi>
p. 355 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In
the hymns composed in his honour, this deity is referred
to as <q>the living disc of the sun, besides whom there
is none other.</q> He is said to have made <q>the far
heaven</q> and <q>men, beasts, and birds; he strengtheneth
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
the eyes with his beams, and when he showeth himself,
all flowers live and grow, the meadows flourish at his
upgoing and are drunken at his sight, all cattle skip on
their feet, and the birds that are in the marsh flutter
for joy.</q> It is he <q>who bringeth the years, createth
the months, maketh the days, calculateth the hours,
the lord of time, by whom men reckon.</q> In his zeal
for the unity of god, the king commanded to erase the
names of all other gods from the monuments, and to
destroy their images. His rage was particularly directed
against the god Ammon, whose name and likeness
were effaced wherever they were found; even the
sanctity of the tomb was violated in order to destroy
the memorials of the hated god. In some of the halls
of the great temples at Carnac, Luxor, and other
places, all the names of the gods, with a few chance
exceptions, were scratched out. In no inscription cut
in this king's reign was any god mentioned save the
sun. He even changed his own name, Amenhôtep,
because it was compounded of Ammon, and took
instead the name of Chuen-'eten, <q>gleam of the sun's
disc.</q> His death was followed by a violent reaction.
The old gods were reinstated in their rank and privileges;
their names and images were restored; and
new temples were built. But all the shrines and
palaces reared by the late king were thrown down;
even the sculptures that referred to him and to his
god in rock-tombs and on the sides of hills were erased
or filled up with stucco; his name appears on no later
monument, and was carefully omitted from all official
lists.
</p>

<p>
This attempt of King Amenhôtep IV is only an
extreme example of a tendency which appears to have
been at work on the religion of Egypt as far back
<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>
as we can trace it. Therefore, to come back to our
point, in attempting to discover the original character
of any Egyptian god, no weight can be given to the
identification of him with other gods, least of all with
the sun-god Ra. Far from helping to follow up the
trail, these identifications only cross and confuse it.
The best evidence for the original character of the
Egyptian gods is to be found in their ritual and myths,
so far as these are known (which unfortunately is little
enough), and in the figured representations of them on
the monuments. It is on evidence drawn from these
sources that I rely mainly for the interpretation of
Osiris as a deity of vegetation.
</p>

<p>
Amongst a younger generation of scholars, Tiele is
of opinion that Osiris is the sun, because <q>in the
hymns, his accession to the throne of his father is compared
to the rising of the sun, and it is even said of
him in so many words: <q>He glitters on the horizon, he
sends out rays of light from his double feather and inundates
the world with it, as the sun from out the highest
heaven.</q></q><note place='foot'>Tiele, <hi rend='italic'>History of the Egyptian Religion</hi>, p. 44.</note> By the same token Marie Antoinette must
have been a goddess of the morning star, because Burke
saw her at Versailles <q>just above the horizon, decorating
and cheering the elevated sphere she just began to
move in,&mdash;glittering like the morning star, full of life,
and splendour, and joy.</q> If such comparisons prove anything,
they prove that Osiris was <emph>not</emph> the sun. There
are always two terms to a comparison; a thing cannot
be compared to itself. But Tiele also appeals to the
monuments. What is his evidence? Osiris is sometimes
represented by a figure surmounted by <q>the so-called
Tat pillar, entirely made up of a kind of superimposed
capitals, one of which has a rude face scratched
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
upon it.</q> Tiele is of opinion that this rude face is <q>intended,
no doubt, to represent the shining sun.</q><note place='foot'>Tiele, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 46.</note> If
every <q>rude face scratched</q> is to be taken as a symbol
of the shining sun, sun-worship will be discovered
in some unexpected places. But, on the whole,
Tiele, like Jablonski, prudently keeps to the high
ground of vague generalities, and the result of his
occasional descents to the level of facts is not such as
to encourage him to prolong his stay. <q>Were we to
come down to details,</q> he says, <q>and to attend to
slight variations, we should be lost in an ocean of symbolism
and mysticism.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 45.</note> This is like De Quincey's
attitude towards murder. <q>General principles I will
suggest. But as to any particular case, once for all I
will have nothing to do with it.</q> There is no having
a man who takes such lofty ground.
</p>

<p>
Mr. Le Page Renouf also considers that Osiris is
the sun,<note place='foot'>Le Page Renouf, <hi rend='italic'>Hibbert Lectures</hi>,
1879, p. 111 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> and his position is still stronger than Tiele's.
For whereas Tiele produces bad arguments for his
view, Mr. Renouf produces none at all, and therefore
cannot possibly be confuted.
</p>

<p>
The ground upon which some recent writers seem
chiefly to rely for the identification of Osiris with the
sun is that the story of his death fits better with the
solar phenomena than with any other in nature. It
may readily be admitted that the daily appearance and
disappearance of the sun might very naturally be expressed
by a myth of his death and resurrection; and
writers who regard Osiris as the sun are careful to
emphasise the fact that it is the diurnal, and not the
annual, course of the sun to which they understand the
myth to apply. Mr. Renouf expressly admits that the
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
Egyptian sun cannot with any show of reason be described
as dead in winter.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Hibbert Lectures</hi>, 1879, p. 113.
Cp. Maspero, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire ancienne</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> p. 35;
Ed. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Alterthums</hi>,
i. §§ 55, 57.</note> But if his <emph>daily</emph> death was
the theme of the legend, why was it celebrated by an
<emph>annual</emph> ceremony? This fact alone seems fatal to the
interpretation of the myth as descriptive of sunset and
sunrise. Again, though the sun may be said to die
daily, in what sense can he be said to be torn in
pieces?<note place='foot'><p>There are far more plausible
grounds for identifying Osiris with the
moon than with the sun&mdash;1. He was
said to have lived or reigned twenty-eight
years; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>,
cc. 13, 42. This might be taken as a
mythical expression for a lunar month.
2. His body was rent into fourteen
pieces (<hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> cc. 18, 42). This might
be interpreted of the moon on the
wane, losing a piece of itself on each of
the fourteen days which make up the
second half of a lunation. It is
expressly mentioned that Typhon found
the body of Osiris at the full moon
(<hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> 8); thus the dismemberment of
the god would begin with the waning
of the moon. 3. In a hymn supposed
to be addressed by Isis to Osiris, it is
said that Thoth
</p>
<p>
<q>Placeth thy soul in the bark Ma-at,<lb/>
In that name which is thine, of <hi rend='smallcaps'>God Moon</hi>.</q>
</p>
<p>
And again,
</p>
<p>
<q>Thou <emph>who comest to us as a child each month</emph>,<lb/>
We do not cease to contemplate thee,<lb/>
Thine emanation heightens the brilliancy<lb/>
Of the stars of Orion in the firmament,</q> etc.
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Records of the Past</hi>, i. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Brugsch,
<hi rend='italic'>Religion und Mythologie der alten
Aegypter</hi>, p. 629 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Here then Osiris
is identified with the moon in set terms.
If in the same hymn he is said to
<q>illuminate us like Ra</q> (the sun), this,
as we have already seen, is no reason
for identifying him with the sun,
but quite the contrary. 4. At the new
moon of the month Phanemoth, being
the beginning of spring, the Egyptians
celebrated what they called <q>the entry
of Osiris into the moon.</q> Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Is. et Os.</hi> 43. 5. The bull Apis, which
was regarded as an image of the soul
of Osiris (<hi rend='italic'>Is. et Os.</hi> cc. 20, 29), was
born of a cow which was believed to
have been impregnated by the moon
(<hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> 43). 6. Once a year, at the full
moon, pigs were sacrificed simultaneously
to the moon and Osiris.
Herodotus, ii. 47; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Is. et Os.</hi>
8. The relation of the pig to Osiris will
be examined later on.
</p>
<p>
Without attempting to explain in detail
why a god of vegetation, as I take
Osiris to have been, should have been
brought into such close connection with
the moon, I may refer to the intimate
relation which is vulgarly believed to
subsist between the growth of vegetation
and the phases of the moon. See
<hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi> Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> ii. 221, xvi.
190, xvii. 108, 215, xviii. 200, 228,
308, 314; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi>
iii. 10, 3; Aulus Gellius, xx. 8, 7;
Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Saturn.</hi> vii. 16, 29 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Many examples are furnished by the
ancient writers on agriculture, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>
Cato, 37, 4; Varro, i. 37; <hi rend='italic'>Geoponica</hi>,
i. 6.</p></note>
</p>

<p>
In the course of our inquiry, it has, I trust, been
made clear that there is another natural phenomenon
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
to which the conception of death and resurrection is as
applicable as to sunset and sunrise, and which, as a
matter of fact has been so conceived and represented
in folk-custom. This phenomenon is the annual growth
and decay of vegetation. A strong reason for interpreting
the death of Osiris as the decay of vegetation
rather than as the sunset is to be found in the general
(though not unanimous) voice of antiquity, which
classed together the worship and myths of Osiris,
Adonis, Attis, Dionysus, and Demeter, as religions of
essentially the same type.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 42, 49, 59, 144,
156; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 13,
35; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> iv. 5, 3; Diodorus,
i. 13, 25, 96, iv. 1; <hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>,
Hymn 42; Eusebius, <hi rend='italic'>Praepar. Evang.</hi>
iii. 11, 31; Servius on Virgil, <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> xi.
287; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, on <hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> i. 166; Hippolytus,
<hi rend='italic'>Refut. omn. haeres.</hi> v. 9, p. 168;
Socrates, <hi rend='italic'>Eccles. Hist.</hi> iii. 23, p. 204;
Tzetzes, <hi rend='italic'>Schol. in Lycophron</hi>, 212;
Διηγήματα, xxii. 2, in <hi rend='italic'>Mythographi
Graeci</hi>, ed. Westermann, p. 368;
Nonnus, <hi rend='italic'>Dionys.</hi> iv. 269 sq.; Cornutus,
<hi rend='italic'>De natura deorum</hi>, c. 28; Clemens
Alexandr. <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. 19; Firmicus
Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore profan. relig.</hi> 7.</note> The consensus of ancient
opinion on this subject seems too great to be rejected
as a mere fancy. So closely did the rites of Osiris
resemble those of Adonis at Byblus that some of the
people of Byblus themselves maintained that it was
Osiris and not Adonis whose death was mourned by
them.<note place='foot'>Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>De dea Syria</hi>, 7.</note> Such a view could certainly not have been
held if the rituals of the two gods had not been so
alike as to be almost indistinguishable. Again, Herodotus
found the similarity between the rites of Osiris
and Dionysus so great, that he thought it impossible
the latter could have arisen independently; they
must, he thought, have been recently borrowed, with
slight alterations, by the Greeks from the Egyptians.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 49.</note>
Again, Plutarch, a very intelligent student of comparative
religion, insists upon the detailed resemblance of
the rites of Osiris to those of Dionysus.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35.</note> We cannot
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
reject the evidence of such intelligent and trustworthy
witnesses on plain matters of fact which fell under their
own cognisance. Their explanations of the worships
it is indeed possible to reject, for the meaning of
religious cults is often open to question; but resemblances
of ritual are matters of observation. Therefore,
those who explain Osiris as the sun are driven
to the alternative of either dismissing as mistaken
the testimony of antiquity to the similarity of the
rites of Osiris, Adonis, Attis, Dionysus, and Demeter,
or of interpreting all these rites as sun-worship.
No modern scholar has fairly faced and accepted
either side of this alternative. To accept the former
would be to affirm that we know the rites of these
deities better than the men who practised, or at least
who witnessed them. To accept the latter would involve
a wrenching, clipping, mangling, and distorting
of myth and ritual from which even Macrobius shrank.<note place='foot'>Osiris, Attis, Adonis, and Dionysus
were all explained by him as the sun;
but he stopped short at Demeter (Ceres),
whom, however, he interpreted as the
moon. See the <hi rend='italic'>Saturnalia</hi>, bk. i.</note>
On the other hand, the view that the essence of all
these rites was the mimic death and revival of vegetation,
explains them separately and collectively in an
easy and natural way, and harmonises with the general
testimony borne by antiquity to their substantial similarity.
The evidence for thus explaining Adonis,
Attis, and Osiris has now been presented to the
reader; it remains to do the same for Dionysus and
Demeter.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='7. Dionysus.'/>
<head>§ 7.&mdash;Dionysus.</head>

<p>
The Greek god Dionysus or Bacchus<note place='foot'>On Dionysus in general see Preller,
<hi rend='italic'>Griechische Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> i. 544 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Fr. Lenormant, article <q>Bacchus</q> in
Daremberg et Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire
des Antiquités grecques et romaines</hi>,
i. 591 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Voigt and Thraemer's
article <q>Dionysus,</q> in Roscher's <hi rend='italic'>Ausführliches
Lexikon der griech. und röm.
Mythologie</hi>, i. c. 1029 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> is best
known as the god of the vine, but he was also a god
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
of trees in general. Thus we are told that almost all
the Greeks sacrificed to <q>Dionysus of the tree.</q><note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> v. 3,
Διονύσῳ δὲ δενδρίτῃ πάντες, ὡς ἔθος
εἰπεῖν, Ἕλληνες θύουσιν.</note> In
Boeotia one of his titles was <q>Dionysus in the tree.</q><note place='foot'>Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Ἔνδενδρος.</note>
His image was often merely an upright post, without
arms, but draped in a mantle, with a bearded mask
to represent the head, and with leafy boughs projecting
from the head or body to show the nature
of the deity.<note place='foot'>See the pictures of his images,
taken from ancient vases, in Bötticher,
<hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus der Hellenen</hi>, plates 42,
43, 43<hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>, 43<hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>, 44; Daremberg et
Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 361, 626.</note> On a vase his rude effigy is depicted
appearing out of a low tree or bush.<note place='foot'>Daremberg et Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> i. 626.</note> He was the
patron of cultivated trees;<note place='foot'>Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>De natura deorum</hi>, 30.</note> prayers were offered to
him that he would make the trees grow;<note place='foot'>Pindar, quoted by Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis
et Osiris</hi>, 35.</note> and he was
especially honoured by husbandmen, chiefly fruit-growers,
who set up an image of him, in the shape
of a natural tree-stump, in their orchards.<note place='foot'>Maximus Tyrius, <hi rend='italic'>Dissertat.</hi> viii.
1.</note> He was
said to have discovered all tree-fruits, amongst which
apples and figs are particularly mentioned;<note place='foot'>Athenaeus, iii. pp. 78 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>, 82 <hi rend='smallcaps'>d</hi>.</note> and he
was himself spoken of as doing a husbandman's work.<note place='foot'>Himerius, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> i. 10, Διόνυσος
γεωργεῖ.</note>
He was referred to as <q>well-fruited,</q> <q>he of the green
fruit,</q> and <q>making the fruit to grow.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>, Hymn l. 4, liii. 8.</note> One of his titles
was <q>teeming</q> or <q>bursting</q> (as of sap or blossoms);<note place='foot'>Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Var. Hist.</hi> iii. 41;
Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Φλέω[ς]. Cp. Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> v. 8, 3.</note>
and there was a Flowery Dionysus in Attica and at
Patrae in Achaea.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, i. 31, 4; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi> vii. 21,
6 (2).</note> Amongst the trees particularly
sacred to him, in addition to the vine, was the pine-tree.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi> v. 3.</note>
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
The Delphic oracle commanded the Corinthians to
worship a particular pine-tree <q>equally with the god,</q>
so they made two images of Dionysus out of it, with
red faces and gilt bodies.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ii. 2, 6 (5) <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>
Pausanias does not mention the kind
of tree; but from Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi>,
1064 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, and Philostratus, <hi rend='italic'>Imag.</hi> i.
17 (18), we may infer that it was a
pine; though Theocritus (xxvi. 11)
speaks of it as a mastich-tree.</note> In art a wand, tipped with
a pine-cone, is commonly carried by the god or his
worshippers.<note place='foot'>Müller-Wieseler, <hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler der
alten Kunst</hi>, ii. pl. xxxii. <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Baumeister, <hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler des klassischen
Altertums</hi>, i. figures 489, 491, 492,
495. Cp. Lenormant in Daremberg et
Saglio, i. 623; Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>,
p. 700.</note> Again, the ivy and the fig-tree were
especially associated with him. In the Attic township
of Acharnae there was a Dionysus Ivy;<note place='foot'>Pausanias, i. 31, 6 (3).</note> at Lacedaemon
there was a Fig Dionysus; and in Naxos,
where figs were called <foreign rend='italic'>meilicha</foreign>, there was a Dionysus
Meilichios, the face of whose image was made of fig-wood.<note place='foot'>Athenaeus, iii. p. 78 <hi rend='smallcaps'>c</hi>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Like the other gods of vegetation whom we have
been considering, Dionysus was believed to have died
a violent death, but to have been brought to life again;
and his sufferings, death, and resurrection were enacted
in his sacred rites. The Cretan myth, as related by
Firmicus, ran thus. He was said to have been the
bastard son of Jupiter (Zeus), a Cretan king. Going
abroad, Jupiter transferred the throne and sceptre to
the child Dionysus, but, knowing that his wife Juno
(Hera) cherished a jealous dislike of the child, he
entrusted Dionysus to the care of guards upon whose
fidelity he believed he could rely. Juno, however,
bribed the guards, and amusing the child with toys
and a cunningly-wrought looking-glass lured him into
an ambush, where her satellites, the Titans, rushed
upon him, cut him limb from limb, boiled his body
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
with various herbs and ate it. But his sister Minerva,
who had shared in the deed, kept his heart and gave it
to Jupiter on his return, revealing to him the whole
history of the crime. In his rage, Jupiter put the
Titans to death by torture, and, to soothe his grief for
the loss of his son, made an image in which he enclosed
the child's heart, and then built a temple in his honour.<note place='foot'>Firmicus Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore profanarum
religionum</hi>, 6.</note>
In this version a Euhemeristic turn has been given to
the myth by representing Jupiter and Juno (Zeus and
Hera) as a king and queen of Crete. The guards
referred to are the mythical Curetes who danced a
war-dance round the infant Dionysus as they are said
to have done round the infant Zeus.<note place='foot'>Clemens Alexandr., <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. 17.
Cp. Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, p. 1111 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Pomegranates
were supposed to have sprung from the blood of
Dionysus,<note place='foot'>Clemens Alexandr., <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. 19.</note> as anemones from the blood of Adonis
and violets from the blood of Attis. According to
some, the severed limbs of Dionysus were pieced
together, at the command of Zeus, by Apollo, who
buried them on Parnassus.<note place='foot'>Clemens Alexandr., <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. 18;
Proclus on Plato's Timaeus, iii. 200 D,
quoted by Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, p. 562,
and by Abel, <hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>, p. 234. Others
said that the mangled body was pieced
together, not by Apollo but by Rhea.
Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>De natura deorum</hi>, 30.</note> The grave of Dionysus
was shown in the Delphic temple beside a golden
statue of Apollo.<note place='foot'>Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, p. 572 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
For a conjectural restoration of the
temple, based on ancient authorities
and an examination of the scanty
remains, see an article by Professor
J. H. Middleton, in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of Hellenic
Studies</hi>, vol. ix. p. 282 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Thus far the resurrection of the
slain god is not mentioned, but in other versions
of the myth it is variously related. One version,
which represented Dionysus as a son of Demeter,
averred that his mother pieced together his mangled
limbs and made him young again.<note place='foot'>Diodorus, iii. 62.</note> In others it is
simply said that shortly after his burial he rose from
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
the dead and ascended up to heaven;<note place='foot'>Macrobius, <hi rend='italic'>Comment. in Somn.
Scip.</hi> i. 12, 12; <hi rend='italic'>Scriptores rerum
mythicarum Latini tres Romae nuper
reperti</hi> (commonly referred to as
<hi rend='italic'>Mythographi Vaticani</hi>), ed. G. H.
Bode (Cellis, 1834), iii. 12, 5, p. 246;
Origen, <hi rend='italic'>c. Cels.</hi> iv. 171, quoted by
Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, p. 713.</note> or that Zeus
raised him up as he lay mortally wounded;<note place='foot'>Himerius, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> ix. 4.</note> or that
Zeus swallowed the heart of Dionysus and then begat
him afresh by Semele,<note place='foot'>Proclus, <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Minerva</hi>, in
Lobeck, <hi rend='italic'>Aglaophamus</hi>, p. 561; <hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>,
ed. Abel, p. 235.</note> who in the common legend
figures as mother of Dionysus. Or, again, the heart
was pounded up and given in a potion to Semele,
who thereby conceived him.<note place='foot'>Hyginus, <hi rend='italic'>Fab.</hi> 167.</note>
</p>

<p>
Turning from the myth to the ritual, we find that
the Cretans celebrated a biennial<note place='foot'>The festivals of Dionysus were
biennial in many places. See Schömann,
<hi rend='italic'>Griechische Alterthümer</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> ii.
500 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> (The terms for the festival
were τριετηρίς, τριετηρικός both terms of
the series being included in the numeration,
in accordance with the ancient mode
of reckoning.) Probably the festivals
were formerly annual and the period
was afterwards lengthened, as has
happened with other festivals. See
W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, pp. 172,
175; 491, 533 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 598. Some of the
festivals of Dionysus, however, were
annual.</note> festival at which the
sufferings and death of Dionysus were represented in
every detail.<note place='foot'>Firmicus Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De err. prof.
relig.</hi> 6.</note> Where the resurrection formed part
of the myth, it also was enacted at the rites,<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Mythogr. Vatic.</hi> ed. Bode, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> and it
even appears that a general doctrine of resurrection,
or at least of immortality, was inculcated on the
worshippers; for Plutarch, writing to console his wife
on the death of their infant daughter, comforts her with
the thought of the immortality of the soul as taught by
tradition and revealed in the mysteries of Dionysus.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Consol. ad uxor.</hi> 10.
Cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De ei
Delphico</hi>, 9; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De esu carnium</hi>, i. 7.</note>
</p>

<p>
A different form of the myth of the death and resurrection
of Dionysus is that he descended into
Hades to bring up his mother Semele from the dead.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ii. 31, 2, and 37,
5; Apollodorus, iii. 5, 3.</note>
The local Argive tradition was that he descended
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
through the Alcyonian lake; and his return from the
lower world, in other words his resurrection, was
annually celebrated on the spot by the Argives, who
summoned him from the water by trumpet blasts,
while they threw a lamb into the lake as an offering
to the warder of the dead.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ii. 37, 5 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Conviv.</hi>
iv. 6, 2.</note> Whether this was a spring
festival does not appear, but the Lydians certainly
celebrated the advent of Dionysus in spring; the god
was supposed to bring the season with him.<note place='foot'>Himerius, <hi rend='italic'>Orat.</hi> iii. 6, xiv. 7.</note> Deities
of vegetation, who are supposed to pass a certain
portion of each year underground, naturally come to be
regarded as gods of the lower world or of the dead.
Both Dionysus and Osiris were so conceived.<note place='foot'>For Dionysus, see Lenormant in
Daremberg et Saglio, i. 632. For
Osiris, see Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and
Customs of the Ancient Egyptians</hi>
(London, 1878), iii. 65.</note>
</p>

<p>
A feature in the mythical character of Dionysus,
which at first sight appears inconsistent with his nature
as a deity of vegetation, is that he was often conceived
and represented in animal shape, especially in the
form, or at least with the horns, of a bull. Thus he
is spoken of as <q>cow-born,</q> <q>bull,</q> <q>bull-shaped,</q>
<q>bull-faced,</q> <q>bull-browed,</q> <q>bull-horned,</q> <q>horn-bearing,</q>
<q>two-horned,</q> <q>horned.</q><note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Graec.</hi> 36; Athenaeus, xi.
476 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>; Clemens Alexandr., <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi>
ii. 16; <hi rend='italic'>Orphica</hi>, Hymn xxx. <hi rend='italic'>vv.</hi> 3, 4,
xlv. 1, lii. 2, liii. 8; Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi>,
99; Schol. on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>,
357; Nicander, <hi rend='italic'>Alexipharmaca</hi>, 31;
Lucian, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchus</hi>, 2.</note> He was believed
to appear, at least occasionally, as a bull.<note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi>, 920 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 1017.</note> His images
were often, as at Cyzicus, made in bull shape,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35;
Athenaeus, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> or with
bull horns;<note place='foot'>Diodorus, iii. 64, 2, iv. 4, 2;
Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>De natura deorum</hi>, 30.</note> and he was painted with horns.<note place='foot'>Diodorus, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Tzetzes, <hi rend='italic'>Schol. in
Lycophr.</hi> 209; Philostratus, <hi rend='italic'>Imagines</hi>,
i. 14 (15).</note> Types
of the horned Dionysus are found amongst the surviving
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
monuments of antiquity.<note place='foot'>Müller-Wieseler, <hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler der
alten Kunst</hi>, ii. pl. xxxiii.; Daremberg
et Saglio, i. 619 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 631; Roscher,
<hi rend='italic'>Ausführl. Lexikon</hi>, i. c. 1149 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> On one statuette he
appears clad in a bull's hide, the head, horns, and
hoofs hanging down behind.<note place='foot'>Welcker, <hi rend='italic'>Alte Denkmäler</hi>, v. taf.
2.</note> At his festivals Dionysus
was believed to appear in bull form. The women
of Elis hailed him as a bull, and prayed him to come
with his bull's-foot. They sang, <q>Come here, Dionysus,
to thy holy temple by the sea; come with the Graces
to thy temple, rushing with thy bull's-foot, O goodly
bull, O goodly bull!</q><note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Graec.</hi> 36; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 35.</note> According to the myth, it was
in the shape of a bull that he was torn to pieces by the
Titans;<note place='foot'>Nonnus, <hi rend='italic'>Dionys.</hi> vi. 205.</note> and the Cretans, in representing the sufferings
and death of Dionysus, tore a live bull to pieces with
their teeth.<note place='foot'>Firmicus Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore profan.
religionum</hi>, 6.</note> Indeed, the rending and devouring of
live bulls and calves appear to have been a regular
feature of the Dionysiac rites.<note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi>, 735 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>;
Schol. on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>, 357.</note> The practice of representing
the god in bull form or with some of the
features of a bull, the belief that he appeared in bull
form to his worshippers at the sacred rites, and the
legend that it was in bull form that he had been torn
in pieces&mdash;all these facts taken together leave no room
to doubt that in rending and devouring a live bull at
his festival his worshippers believed that they were
killing the god, eating his flesh, and drinking his blood.
</p>

<p>
Another animal whose form Dionysus assumed was
the goat. One of his names was <q><foreign rend='italic'>Kid.</foreign></q><note place='foot'>Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Ἔριφος ὁ Διόνυσος,
on which there is a marginal gloss
ὁ μικρὸς αἴξ, ὁ ἐν τῷ ἔαρι φαινόμενος,
ἤγουν ὁ πρώϊμος; Stephanus Byzant.
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Ἀκρώρεια. The title Εἰραφιώτης is
probably to be explained in the same
way. [Homer], <hi rend='italic'>Hymn</hi> xxxiv. 2; Porphyry,
<hi rend='italic'>De abstin.</hi> iii. 17; Dionysius,
<hi rend='italic'>Perieg.</hi> 576; <hi rend='italic'>Etymolog. Magnum</hi>, p.
371, 57.</note> To save
him from the wrath of Hera, his father Zeus changed
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
him into a kid;<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, iii. 4, 3.</note> and when the gods fled to Egypt to
escape the fury of Typhon, Dionysus was turned into
a goat.<note place='foot'>Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> v. 329; Antoninus
Liberalis, 28; <hi rend='italic'>Mythogr. Vatic.</hi> ed.
Bode, i. 86, p. 29.</note> Hence when his worshippers rent in pieces
a live goat and devoured it raw,<note place='foot'>Arnobius, <hi rend='italic'>Adv. nationes</hi>, v. 19.
Cp. Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> αἰγίζειν. As fawns
appear to have been also torn in pieces
at the rites of Dionysus (Photius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
νεβρίζειν; Harpocration, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> νεβρίζων),
it is probable that the fawn was another
of the god's embodiments. But of
this there seems no direct evidence.
Fawn-skins were worn both by the god
and his worshippers (Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>De
natura deorum</hi>, c. 30). Similarly the
female Bacchanals wore goat-skins
(Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> τραγηφόροι).</note> they must have
believed that they were eating the body and blood of
the god.
</p>

<p>
This custom of killing a god in animal form, which
we shall examine more fully presently, belongs to a
very early stage in human culture, and is apt in later
times to be misunderstood. The advance of thought
tends to strip the old animal and plant gods of their
bestial and vegetable husk, and to leave their human
attributes (which are always the kernel of the conception)
as the final and sole residuum. In other words,
animal and plant gods tend to become purely anthropomorphic.
When they have become wholly or nearly
so, the animals and plants which were at first the
deities themselves, still retain a vague and ill-understood
connection with the anthropomorphic gods which
have been developed out of them. The origin of the
relationship between the deity and the animal or plant
having been forgotten, various stories are invented to
explain it. These explanations may follow one of two
lines according as they are based on the habitual or on
the exceptional treatment of the sacred animal or plant.
The sacred animal was habitually spared, and only
exceptionally slain; and accordingly the myth might
be devised to explain either why it was spared or why
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
it was killed. Devised for the former purpose, the
myth would tell of some service rendered to the deity
by the animal; devised for the latter purpose, the
myth would tell of some injury inflicted by the animal
on the god. The reason given for sacrificing goats to
Dionysus is an example of a myth of the latter sort.
They were sacrificed to him, it was said, because
they injured the vine.<note place='foot'>Varro, <hi rend='italic'>De re rustica</hi> i. 2, 19; Virgil,
<hi rend='italic'>Georg.</hi> ii. 380, and Servius, <hi rend='italic'>ad I.</hi>, and
on <hi rend='italic'>Aen.</hi> iii. 118; Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, i. 353
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, Metam. xv. 114 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Cornutus,
<hi rend='italic'>De natura deorum</hi>, 30.</note> Now the goat, as we have
seen, was originally an embodiment of the god himself.
But when the god had divested himself of his
animal character and had become essentially anthropomorphic,
the killing of the goat in his worship
came to be regarded no longer as a slaying of the god
himself, but as a sacrifice to him; and since some
reason had to be assigned why the goat in particular
should be sacrificed, it was alleged that this was
a punishment inflicted on the goat for injuring the
vine, the object of the god's especial care. Thus we
have the strange spectacle of a god sacrificed to himself
on the ground that he is his own enemy. And as
the god is supposed to partake of the victim offered to
him, it follows that, when the victim is the god's old
self, the god eats of his own flesh. Hence the
goat-god Dionysus is represented as eating raw goat's
blood;<note place='foot'>Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Bacchae</hi>, 138 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> ἀγρεύων
αἷμα τραγοκτόνον, ὡμοφάγον χάριν.</note> and the bull-god Dionysus is called <q>eater of
bulls.</q><note place='foot'>Schol. on Aristophanes, <hi rend='italic'>Frogs</hi>,
357.</note> On the analogy of these instances we may
conjecture that wherever a god is described as the
eater of a particular animal, the animal in question was
originally nothing but the god himself.<note place='foot'>Hera αἱγοφάγος at Sparta, Pausanias,
iii. 15, 9 (cp. the representation
of Hera clad in a goat's skin, with the
animal's head and horns over her head,
Müller-Wieseler, <hi rend='italic'>Denkmäler der alten
Kunst</hi>, i. No. 299 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>); Apollo ὁψοφάγος
at Elis, Athenaeus, 346 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>; Artemis
καπροφάγος in Samos, Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>
καπροφάγος; cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> κριοφάγος.
Divine titles derived from <emph>killing</emph>
animals are probably to be similarly
explained, as Dionysus αἱγόβολος,
Pausanias ix. 8, 2; Rhea or Hecate
κυνοσφαγής, Tzetzes, <hi rend='italic'>Schol. in Lycophr.</hi>
77; Apollo λυκοκτόνος, Sophocles,
<hi rend='italic'>Electra</hi>, 6; Apollo σαυροκτόνος, Pliny,
<hi rend='italic'>Nat. Hist.</hi> xxxiv. 70.</note>
</p>

<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>

<p>
All this, however, does not explain why a deity of
vegetation should appear in animal form. But the
consideration of this point had better be deferred till
we have discussed the character and attributes of
Demeter. Meantime it remains to point out that in
some places, instead of an animal, a human being was
torn in pieces at the rites of Dionysus. This was the
custom in Chios and Tenedos;<note place='foot'>Porphyry, <hi rend='italic'>De abstin.</hi> ii. 55.</note> and at Potniae in
Boeotia the tradition ran that it had been formerly the
custom to sacrifice to the goat-smiting Dionysus a
child, for whom a goat was afterwards substituted.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, ix. 8, 2.</note>
At Orchomenus the human victim was taken from the
women of a certain family, called the Oleiae. At the
annual festival the priest of Dionysus pursued these
women with a drawn sword, and if he overtook one of
them he had a right to slay her. This right was exercised
as late as Plutarch's time.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Quaest. Graec.</hi> 38.</note> As the slain bull
or goat represented the slain god, so, we may suppose,
the human victim also represented him. It is possible,
however, that a tradition of human sacrifice may sometimes
have been a mere misinterpretation of a sacrificial
ritual in which an animal victim was treated as a
human being. For example, at Tenedos the new-born
calf sacrificed to Dionysus was shod in buskins, and
the mother cow was tended like a woman in child-bed.<note place='foot'>Aelian, <hi rend='italic'>Nat. An.</hi> xii. 34. Cp. W.
Robertson Smith, <hi rend='italic'>Religion of the Semites</hi>,
i. 286 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='8. Demeter and Proserpine.'/>
<head>§ 8.&mdash;Demeter and Proserpine.</head>

<p>
The Greek myth of Demeter and Proserpine is
substantially identical with the Syrian myth of Aphrodite
(Astarte) and Adonis, the Phrygian myth of
Cybele and Attis, and the Egyptian myth of Isis and
Osiris. In the Greek myth, as in its Asiatic and
Egyptian counterparts, a goddess&mdash;Demeter&mdash;mourns
the loss of a loved one&mdash;Proserpine&mdash;who personifies
the vegetation, more especially the corn, which dies
in summer<note place='foot'>It is to be remembered that on the
Mediterranean coasts the harvest never
falls so late as autumn.</note> to revive in spring. But in the Greek
myth the loved and lost one is the daughter instead
of the husband or lover of the goddess; and
the mother as well as the daughter is a goddess
of the corn.<note place='foot'>On Demeter as a corn-goddess see
Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische Forschungen</hi>,
p. 224 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; on Proserpine in the same
character see Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>De nat. deor.</hi>
c. 28; Varro in Augustine, <hi rend='italic'>Civ. Dei</hi>,
vii. 20; Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Φερσεφόνεια;
Firmicus Maternus, <hi rend='italic'>De errore prof.
relig.</hi> 17. In his careful account of
Demeter as a corn-goddess Mannhardt
appears to have overlooked the very
important statement of Hippolytus
(<hi rend='italic'>Refut. omn. haeres.</hi> v. 8, p. 162, ed.
Duncker and Schneidewin) that at the
initiation into the Eleusinian mysteries
(the most famous of all the rites of
Demeter) the central mystery revealed to
the initiated was a reaped ear of corn.</note> Thus, as modern scholars have
recognised,<note place='foot'>Welcker, <hi rend='italic'>Griechische Götterlehre</hi>,
ii. 532; Preller, in Pauly's <hi rend='italic'>Real-Encyclopädie
für class. Alterthumswiss</hi>.
vi. 107; Lenormant, in Daremberg
et Saglio, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionnaire des Antiquités
grecques et romaines</hi>, i. pt. ii. 1047
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Demeter and Proserpine are merely a
mythical reduplication of the same natural phenomenon.
Proserpine, so ran the Greek myth,<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Demeter</hi>; Apollodorus,
i. 5; Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv. 425
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> v. 385 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> was
gathering flowers when the earth gaped, and Pluto,
lord of the Dead, issuing from the abyss, carried her
off on his golden car to be his bride in the gloomy
subterranean world. Her sorrowing mother Demeter
sought her over land and sea, and learning from the
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
Sun her daughter's fate, she suffered not the seed to
grow, but kept it hidden in the ground, so that the
whole race of men would have died of hunger if Zeus
had not sent and fetched Proserpine from the nether
world. Finally it was agreed that Proserpine should
spend a third, or according to others a half,<note place='foot'>A third, according to Homer, <hi rend='italic'>H.
to Demeter</hi>, 399, and Apollodorus, i.
5, 3; a half, according to Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>,
iv. 614; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Metam.</hi> v. 567; Hyginus,
<hi rend='italic'>Fab.</hi> 146.</note> of each
year with Pluto underground, but should come forth in
spring to dwell with her mother and the gods in the
upper world. Her annual death and resurrection, that
is, her annual descent into the under world and her
ascension from it, appear to have been represented in
her rites.<note place='foot'>Schömann, <hi rend='italic'>Griech. Alterthümer</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
ii. 393; Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Griech. Mythologie</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi>
i. 628 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 644 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 650 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> The
evidence of the ancients on this head,
though not full and definite, seems
sufficient. See Diodorus, v. 4; Firmicus
Maternus, cc. 7, 27; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Isis et Osiris</hi>, 69; Apuleius, <hi rend='italic'>Met.</hi> vi. 2;
Clemens Alex., <hi rend='italic'>Protrept.</hi> ii. §§ 12, 17.</note>
</p>

<p>
With regard to the name Demeter, it has been
plausibly argued by Mannhardt<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Mythol. Forschungen</hi>, p. 292 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> that the first part of
the word is derived from <foreign rend='italic'>dēai</foreign>, a Cretan word for
<q>barley</q>;<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Etymol. Magnum</hi>, p. 264, 12 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and that thus Demeter means the Barley-mother
or the Corn-mother; for the root of the word
appears to have been applied to different kinds of
grain by different branches of the Aryans, and even
of the Greeks themselves.<note place='foot'>O. Schrader, <hi rend='italic'>Sprachvergleichung
und Urgeschichte</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> (Jena, 1890), pp. 409,
422; V. Hehn, <hi rend='italic'>Kulturpflanzen und
Hausthiere in ihrem Uebergang aus
Asien</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>4</hi> p. 54. Δηαί is doubtless equivalent
etymologically to ζειαί, which is
often taken to be spelt, but this seems
uncertain.</note> As Crete appears to
have been one of the most ancient seats of the worship
of Demeter,<note place='foot'>Hesiod, <hi rend='italic'>Theog.</hi> 971; Lenormant,
in Daremberg et Saglio, i. pt. ii. p.
1029.</note> it is not surprising that her name
should be of Cretan origin. This explanation of
the name Demeter is supported by a host of analogies
which the diligence of Mannhardt has collected
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
from modern European folk-lore, and of which the
following are specimens. In Germany the corn is
very commonly personified under the name of the
Corn-mother. Thus in spring, when the wind sets
the corn in wave-like motion, the peasants say, <q>There
comes the Corn-mother,</q> or <q>The Corn-mother is
running over the field,</q> or <q>The Corn-mother is going
through the corn.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythol. Forsch.</hi> p. 296.</note> When children wish to go into
the fields to pull the blue corn-flowers or the red
poppies, they are told not to do so, because the Corn-mother
is sitting in the corn and will catch them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 297.</note> Or
again she is called, according to the crop, the Rye-mother
or the Pea-mother, and children are warned
against straying in the rye or among the peas by
threats of the Rye-mother or the Pea-mother. In Norway
also the Pea-mother is said to sit among the peas.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 297 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
Similar expressions are current among the Slavs. The
Poles and Czechs warn children against the Corn-mother
who sits in the corn. Or they call her the Old
Corn-woman, and say that she sits in the corn and
strangles the children who tread it down.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 299.</note> The
Lithuanians say, <q>The Old Rye-woman sits in the
corn.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 300.</note> Again the Corn-mother is believed to make
the crop grow. Thus in the neighbourhood of Magdeburg
it is sometimes said, <q>It will be a good year for
flax; the Flax-mother has been seen.</q> At Dinkelsbühl
(Bavaria) down to fifteen or twenty years ago, people
believed that when the crops on a particular farm compared
unfavourably with those of the neighbourhood,
the reason was that the Corn-mother had punished the
farmer for his sins.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 310.</note> In a village of Styria it is
said that the Corn-mother, in the shape of a female
<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>
puppet made out of the last sheaf of corn and dressed
in white, may be seen at midnight in the corn-fields,
which she fertilises by passing through them; but if
she is angry with a farmer, she withers up all his
corn.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythol. Forsch.</hi> p. 310 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Further, the Corn-mother plays an important part in
harvest customs. She is believed to be present in the
handful of corn which is left standing last on the field;
and with the cutting of this last handful she is caught,
or driven away, or killed. In the first of these cases,
the last sheaf is carried joyfully home and honoured as
a divine being. It is placed in the barn, and at
threshing the corn-spirit appears again.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 316.</note> In the
district of Hadeln (Hanover) the reapers stand round
the last sheaf and beat it with sticks in order to drive
the Corn-mother out of it. They call to each
other, <q>There she is! hit her! Take care she doesn't
catch you!</q> The beating goes on till the grain is
completely threshed out; then the Corn-mother is
believed to be driven away.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 316.</note> In the neighbourhood
of Danzig the person who cuts the last ears of corn
makes them into a doll, which is called the Corn-mother
or the Old Woman, and is brought home on the last
waggon.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 316 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some parts of Holstein the last sheaf is
dressed in woman's clothes and called the Corn-mother.
It is carried home on the last waggon, and then
thoroughly drenched with water. The drenching with
water is doubtless a rain-charm.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the district of
Bruck in Styria the last sheaf, called the Corn-mother,
is made up into the shape of a woman by the oldest
married woman in the village, of an age from fifty to
fifty-five years. The finest ears are plucked out of it
<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>
and made into a wreath, which, twined with flowers, is
carried on her head by the prettiest girl of the village
to the farmer or squire, while the Corn-mother is laid
down in the barn to keep off the mice.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 317.</note> In other
villages of the same district the Corn-mother, at the
close of harvest, is carried by two lads at the top of a
pole. They march behind the girl who wears the
wreath to the squire's house, and while he receives
the wreath and hangs it up in the hall, the Corn-mother
is placed on the top of a pile of wood, where
she is the centre of the harvest supper and dance.
Afterwards she is hung up in the barn and remains
there till the threshing is over. The man who gives
the last stroke at threshing is called the son of the
Corn-mother; he is tied up in the Corn-mother, beaten,
and carried through the village. The wreath is
dedicated in church on the following Sunday; and on
Easter Eve the grain is rubbed out of it by a seven
years' old girl and scattered amongst the young corn.
At Christmas the straw of the wreath is placed in the
manger to make the cattle thrive.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 317 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Here the fertilising
power of the Corn-mother is plainly brought out
by scattering the seed taken from her body (for the
wreath is made out of the Corn-mother) among the
new corn; and her influence over animal life is
indicated by placing the straw in the manger. At
Westerhüsen in Saxony the last corn cut is made in
the shape of a woman decked with ribbons and cloth.
It is fastened on a pole and brought home on the last
waggon. One of the people on the waggon keeps
waving the pole, so that the figure moves as if alive.
It is placed on the threshing-floor, and stays there till
the threshing is done.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 318.</note> Amongst the Slavs also the
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
last sheaf is known as the Rye-mother, the Wheat-mother,
the Oats-mother, the Barley-mother, etc.,
according to the crop. In the district of Tarnow,
Galicia, the wreath made out of the last stalks is
called the Wheat-mother, Rye-mother, or Pea-mother.
It is placed on a girl's head and kept till spring, when
some of the grain is mixed with the seed-corn.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythol. Forsch.</hi> p. 318.</note> Here
again the fertilising power of the Corn-mother is
indicated. In France, also, in the neighbourhood of
Auxerre, the last sheaf goes by the name of the
Mother of the Wheat, Mother of the Barley, Mother of
the Rye, or Mother of the Oats. It is left standing
in the field till the last waggon is about to wend
homewards. Then a puppet is made out of it, dressed
with clothes belonging to the farmer, and adorned
with a crown and a blue or white scarf. A branch
of a tree is stuck in the breast of the puppet, which
is now called the Ceres. At the dance in the evening
the Ceres is placed in the middle of the floor, and the
reaper who reaped fastest dances round it with the
prettiest girl for his partner. After the dance a pyre is
made. All the girls, each wearing a wreath, strip the
puppet, pull it to pieces, and place it on the pyre, along
with the flowers with which it was adorned. Then
the girl who was the first to finish reaping sets fire
to the pile, and all pray that Ceres may give a fruitful
year. Here, as Mannhardt observes, the old custom
has remained intact, though the name Ceres is a bit of
schoolmaster's learning.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 318 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Upper Britanny the last
sheaf is always made into human shape; but if the
farmer is a married man, it is made double and consists
of a little corn-puppet placed inside of a large one.
This is called the Mother-sheaf. It is delivered to the
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
farmer's wife, who unties it and gives drink-money
in return.<note place='foot'>Sébillot, <hi rend='italic'>Coutumes populaires de la
Haute-Bretagne</hi>, p. 306.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes the last sheaf is called, not the Corn-mother,
but the Harvest-mother or the Great Mother.
In the province of Osnabrück (Hanover) it is called the
Harvest-mother; it is made up in female form, and
then the reapers dance about with it. In some parts
of Westphalia the last sheaf at the rye harvest is made
especially heavy by fastening stones in it. It is brought
home on the last waggon and is called the Great
Mother, though no special shape is given it. In the
district of Erfurt a very heavy sheaf (not necessarily
the last) is called the Great Mother, and is carried on
the last waggon to the barn, where it is lifted down by
all hands amid a fire of jokes.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 319.</note>
</p>

<p>
Sometimes again the last sheaf is called the
Grandmother, and is adorned with flowers, ribbons,
and a woman's apron. In East Prussia, at the rye
or wheat harvest, the reapers call out to the woman
who binds the last sheaf, <q>You are getting the Old
Grandmother.</q> In the neighbourhood of Magdeburg
the men and women servants strive who shall get
the last sheaf, called the Grandmother. Whoever gets
it will be married in the next year, but his or her
spouse will be old; if a girl gets it, she will marry
a widower; if a man gets it, he will marry an old
crone. In Silesia the Grandmother&mdash;a huge bundle
made up of three or four sheaves by the person who
tied the last sheaf&mdash;was formerly fashioned into a rude
likeness of the human form.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 320.</note> In the neighbourhood
of Belfast the last sheaf is sometimes called Granny.
It is not cut in the usual way, but all the reapers throw
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
their sickles at it and try to bring it down. It is
plaited and kept till the (next?) autumn. Whoever
gets it will marry in the course of the year.<note place='foot'>Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythol. Forsch.</hi> p. 321.</note>
</p>

<p>
Oftener the last sheaf is called the Old Woman
or the Old Man. In Germany it is often shaped and
dressed as a woman, and the person who cuts it or binds
it is said to <q>get the Old Woman.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> pp. 321, 323, 325 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Altisheim in
Swabia when all the corn of a farm has been cut
except a single strip, all the reapers stand in a row
before the strip; each cuts his share rapidly, and he
who gives the last cut <q>has the Old Woman.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 323; Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur
deutschen Mythologie</hi>, ii. p. 219, No. 403.</note> When
the sheaves are being set up in heaps, the person who
gets hold of the Old Woman, which is the largest and
thickest of all the sheaves, is jeered at by the rest, who
sing out to him, <q>He has the Old Woman and must
keep her.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 325.</note> The woman who binds the last sheaf
is sometimes herself called the Old Woman, and it
is said that she will be married in the next year.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 323.</note> In
Neusaass, West Prussia, both the last sheaf&mdash;which is
dressed up in jacket, hat and ribbons&mdash;and the woman
who binds it are called the Old Woman. Together
they are brought home on the last waggon and are
drenched with water.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi></note> At Hornkampe, near Tiegenhof
(West Prussia), when a man or woman lags behind
the rest in binding the corn, the other reapers dress
up the last sheaf in the form of a man or woman,
and this figure goes by the laggard's name, as <q>the
old Michael,</q> <q>the idle Trine.</q> It is brought home
on the last waggon, and, as it nears the house, the
bystanders call out to the laggard, <q>You have got the
Old Woman and must keep her.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 323 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>

<p>
In these customs, as Mannhardt has remarked, the
person who is called by the same name as the last
sheaf and sits beside it on the last waggon is obviously
identified with it; he or she represents the corn-spirit
which has been caught in the last sheaf; in other
words, the corn-spirit is represented in duplicate, by a
human being and by a sheaf.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 324.</note> The identification of
the person with the sheaf is made still clearer by the
custom of wrapping up in the last sheaf the person
who cuts or binds it. Thus at Hermsdorf in Silesia
it used to be the regular custom to tie up in the last
sheaf the woman who had bound it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 320.</note> At Weiden in
Bavaria it is the cutter, not the binder, of the last sheaf
who is tied up in it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 325.</note> Here the person wrapt up in
the corn represents the corn-spirit, exactly as a person
wrapt in branches or leaves represents the tree-spirit.<note place='foot'>See abbove, p. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The last sheaf, designated as the Old Woman, is
often distinguished from the other sheaves by its size
and weight. Thus in some villages of West Prussia
the Old Woman is made twice as long and thick as a
common sheaf, and a stone is fastened in the middle of
it. Sometimes it is made so heavy that a man can
barely lift it.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 324.</note> Sometimes eight or nine sheaves are tied
together to make the Old Woman, and the man who
sets it up complains of its weight.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 324 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Itzgrund, in
Saxe-Coburg, the last sheaf, called the Old Woman,
is made large with the express intention of thereby
securing a good crop next year.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 325.</note> Thus the custom of
making the last sheaf unusually large or heavy is a
charm, working by sympathetic magic, to secure a
large and heavy crop in the following year.
</p>

<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>

<p>
In Denmark also the last sheaf is made larger than
the others, and is called the Old Rye-woman or the Old
Barley-woman. No one likes to bind it, because whoever
does so will, it is believed, marry an old man or
an old woman. Sometimes the last wheat-sheaf, called
the Old Wheat-woman, is made up in human shape,
with head, arms, and legs, is dressed in clothes and
carried home on the last waggon, the harvesters sitting
beside it, drinking and huzzaing.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 327.</note> Of the person who
binds the last sheaf it is said, <q>She (or he) is the Old
Rye-woman.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 328.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Scotland, when the last corn was cut after
Hallowmas, the female figure made out of it was
sometimes called the Carlin or Carline, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> the Old
Woman. But if cut before Hallowmas, it was called
the Maiden; if cut after sunset, it was called the
Witch, being supposed to bring bad luck.<note place='foot'>Jamieson, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of the Scottish
Language</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Maiden</q>; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Mythol. Forschungen</hi>, p. 326.</note> We shall
return to the Maiden presently. In County Antrim,
down to a few years ago, when the sickle was finally
expelled by the reaping machine, the few stalks of corn
left standing last on the field were plaited together;
then the reapers, blindfolded, threw their sickles at the
plaited corn, and whoever happened to cut it through
took it home with him and put it over his door. This
bunch of corn was called the Carley<note place='foot'>Communicated by my friend Prof.
W. Ridgeway, of Queen's College,
Cork.</note>&mdash;probably the
same word as Carlin.
</p>

<p>
Similar customs are observed by Slavonic peoples.
Thus in Poland the last sheaf is commonly called the
Baba, that is, the Old Woman. <q>In the last sheaf,</q>
it is said, <q>sits the Baba.</q> The sheaf itself is also
called the Baba, and is sometimes composed of twelve
<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>
smaller sheaves lashed together.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 328.</note> In some parts of
Bohemia the Baba, made out of the last sheaf, has the
figure of a woman with a great straw hat. It is carried
home on the last harvest-waggon and delivered, along
with a garland, to the farmer by two girls. In binding
the sheaves the women strive not to be last, for
she who binds the last sheaf will have a child next
year.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi></note> The last sheaf is tied up with others into a
large bundle, and a green branch is stuck on the top
of it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 328 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Sometimes the harvesters call out to the woman
who binds the last sheaf, <q>She has the Baba,</q> or <q>She
is the Baba.</q> She has then to make a puppet, sometimes
in female, sometimes in male form, out of the
corn; the puppet is occasionally dressed with clothes,
often with flowers and ribbons only. The cutter of
the last stalks, as well as the binder of the last sheaf,
was also called Baba; and a doll, called the Harvest-woman,
was made out of the last sheaf and adorned
with ribbons. The oldest reaper had to dance, first
with this doll, and then with the farmer's wife.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 329.</note> In
the district of Cracow, when a man binds the last
sheaf, they say, <q>The Grandfather is sitting in it;</q>
when a woman binds it, they say, <q>The Baba is sitting
in it,</q> and the woman herself is wrapt up in the sheaf,
so that only her head projects out of it. Thus encased
in the sheaf, she is carried on the last harvest-waggon
to the house, where she is drenched with water by the
whole family. She remains in the sheaf till the dance
is over, and for a year she retains the name of Baba.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 330.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Lithuania the name for the last sheaf is Boba
(Old Woman), answering to the Polish name Baba.
The Boba is said to sit in the corn which is left
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
standing last.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 330.</note> The person who binds the last sheaf
or digs the last potato is the subject of much banter,
and receives and long retains the name of the Old
Rye-woman or the Old Potato-woman.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 331.</note> The last
sheaf&mdash;the Boba&mdash;is made into the form of a woman,
carried solemnly through the village on the last harvest-waggon,
and drenched with water at the farmer's house;
then every one dances with it.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 331.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Russia also the last sheaf is often shaped and
dressed as a woman, and carried with dance and song
to the farmhouse. Out of the last sheaf the Bulgarians
make a doll which they call the Corn-queen or Corn-mother;
it is dressed in a woman's shirt, carried round
the village, and then thrown into the river in order to
secure plenty of rain and dew for the next year's crop.
Or it is burned and the ashes strewn on the fields,
doubtless to fertilise them.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 332.</note> The name Queen, as
applied to the last sheaf, has its analogies in Northern
Europe. Thus Brand quotes from Hutchinson's <hi rend='italic'>History
of Northumberland</hi> the following: <q>I have seen, in
some places, an image apparelled in great finery,
crowned with flowers, a sheaf of corn placed under
her arm, and a sycle in her hand, carried out of the
village in the morning of the conclusive reaping day,
with music and much clamour of the reapers, into the
field, where it stands fixed on a pole all day, and when
the reaping is done, is brought home in like manner.
This they call the Harvest Queen, and it represents
the Roman Ceres.</q><note place='foot'>Hutchinson, <hi rend='italic'>History of Northumberland</hi>,
ii. <hi rend='italic'>ad finem</hi>, 17, quoted by
Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, ii. 20,
Bohn's ed.</note> From Cambridge also Dr. E.
D. Clarke reported that <q>at the Hawkie [harvest-home],
as it is called, I have seen a clown dressed in
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
woman's clothes, having his face painted, his head
decorated with ears of corn, and bearing about him
other symbols of Ceres, carried in a waggon, with great
pomp and loud shouts, through the streets, the horses
being covered with white sheets; and when I inquired
the meaning of the ceremony, was answered by the
people, that they were drawing the Harvest Queen.</q><note place='foot'>Quoted by Brand, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 22.</note>
</p>

<p>
Often the customs we have been examining are
practised, not on the harvest field, but on the threshing-floor.
The spirit of the corn, fleeing before the reapers
as they cut down the corn, quits the cut corn and takes
refuge in the barn, where it appears in the last sheaf
threshed, either to perish under the blows of the flail
or to flee thence to the still unthreshed corn of a neighbouring
farm.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythol. Forsch.</hi> p. 333 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Thus the last corn to be threshed is
called the Mother-corn or the Old Woman. Sometimes
the person who gives the last stroke with the
flail is called the Old Woman, and is wrapt in the
straw of the last sheaf, or has a bundle of straw
fastened on his back. Whether wrapt in the straw or
carrying it on his back, he is carted through the village
amid general laughter. In some districts of Bavaria,
Thüringen, etc., the man who threshes the last sheaf
is said to have the Old Woman or the Old Corn-woman;
he is tied up in straw, carried or carted about
the village, and set down at last on the dunghill, or
taken to the threshing-floor of a neighbouring farmer
who has not finished his threshing.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 334.</note> In Poland the
man who gives the last stroke at threshing is called
Baba (Old Woman); he is wrapt in corn and wheeled
through the village.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 334.</note> Sometimes in Lithuania the last
sheaf is not threshed, but is fashioned into female
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
shape and carried to the barn of a neighbour who has
not finished his threshing.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 336.</note> In some parts of Sweden,
when a stranger woman appears on the threshing-floor,
a flail is put round her body, stalks of corn are
wound round her neck, a crown of ears is placed on
her head, and the threshers call out, <q>Behold the
Corn-woman.</q> Here the stranger woman, thus
suddenly appearing, is taken to be the corn-spirit who
has just been expelled by the flails from the corn-stalks.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 336.</note>
In other cases the farmer's wife represents
the corn-spirit. Thus in the Commune of Saligné,
Canton de Poiret (Vendée), the farmer's wife, along
with the last sheaf, is tied up in a sheet, placed on a
litter, and carried to the threshing machine, under
which she is shoved. Then the woman is drawn out
and the sheaf is threshed by itself, but the woman is
tossed in the sheet (in imitation of winnowing).<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 336; <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, p. 612.</note> It
would be impossible to express more clearly the identification
of the woman with the corn than by this
graphic imitation of threshing and winnowing her.
</p>

<p>
In these customs the spirit of the ripe corn is
regarded as old, or at least as of mature age. Hence
the names of Mother, Grandmother, Old Woman, etc.
But in other cases the corn-spirit is conceived as young,
sometimes as a child who is separated from its mother
by the stroke of the sickle. This last view appears in
the Polish custom of calling out to the man who cuts
the last handful of corn, <q>You have cut the navel-string.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 28.</note>
In some districts of West Prussia the figure
made out of the last sheaf is called the Bastard, and a boy
is wrapt up in it. The woman who binds the last sheaf
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
and represents the Corn-mother, is told that she is about
to be brought to bed; she cries like a woman in travail,
and an old woman in the character of grandmother
acts as midwife. At last a cry is raised that the child
is born; whereupon the boy who is tied up in the
sheaf whimpers and squalls like an infant. The grandmother
wraps a sack, in imitation of swaddling bands,
round the pretended baby, and it is carried joyfully to
the barn, lest it catch cold in the open air.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> In other
parts of North Germany, the last sheaf, or the puppet
made out of it, is called the Child, the Harvest Child,
etc. In the North of England the last handful of
corn was cut by the prettiest girl and dressed up as
the Corn Baby or Kern Baby; it was brought home
to music, set up in a conspicuous place at the harvest
supper, and generally kept in the parlour for the rest of
the year. The girl who cut it was the Harvest Queen.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi>; Henderson, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the
Northern Counties</hi>, p. 87; Brand,
<hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, ii. 20, Bohn's
ed.; Chambers's <hi rend='italic'>Book of Days</hi>, ii.
377 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Cp. <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vii.
50.</note>
In Kent the Ivy Girl is (or was) <q>a figure composed of
some of the best corn the field produces, and made as
well as they can into a human shape; this is afterwards
curiously dressed by the women, and adorned with
paper trimmings, cut to resemble a cap, ruffles, handkerchief,
etc., of the finest lace. It is brought home
with the last load of corn from the field upon the waggon,
and they suppose entitles them to a supper at the
expense of the employer.</q><note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 21 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In the neighbourhood of
Balquhidder, Perthshire, the last handful of corn is cut
by the youngest girl on the field, and is made into the
rude form of a female doll, clad in a paper dress, and
decked with ribbons. It is called the Maiden, and is
kept in the farmhouse, generally above the chimney,
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
for a good while, sometimes till the Maiden of the next
year is brought in. The writer of this book witnessed
the ceremony of cutting the Maiden at Balquhidder in
September 1888.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vi. 268 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> On some farms on the Gareloch,
Dumbartonshire, about sixty years ago the last handful
of standing corn was called the Maiden. It was
divided in two, plaited, and then cut with the sickle by
a girl, who, it was thought, would be lucky and would
soon be married. When it was cut the reapers
gathered together and threw their sickles in the air.
The Maiden was dressed with ribbons and hung in the
kitchen near the roof, where it was kept for several
years with the date attached. Sometimes five or six
Maidens might be seen hanging at once on hooks.
The harvest supper was called the Kirn.<note place='foot'>From information supplied by
Archie Leitch, gardener, Rowmore,
Garelochhead.</note> In other
farms on the Gareloch the last handful of corn was
called the Maidenhead or the Head; it was neatly
plaited, sometimes decked with ribbons, and hung in
the kitchen for a year, when the grain was given to
the poultry.<note place='foot'>Communicated by Mr. Macfarlane
of Faslane, Gareloch.</note> In the North of Scotland, the Maiden
is kept till Christmas morning, and then divided
among the cattle <q>to make them thrive all the year
round.</q><note place='foot'>Jamieson, <hi rend='italic'>Dictionary of the Scottish
Language</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Maiden.</q></note> In Aberdeenshire also the last sheaf (called
the clyack sheaf) was formerly cut, as it is still cut at
Balquhidder, by the youngest girl on the field; then
it was dressed in woman's clothes, carried home in
triumph, and kept till Christmas or New Year's morning,
when it was given to a mare in foal, or, failing
such, to the oldest cow.<note place='foot'>W. Gregor, in <hi rend='italic'>Revue des Traditions
populaires</hi>, iii. 533 (485 B); <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
of the North-East of Scotland</hi>, p.
182. An old Scottish name for the
Maiden (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>autumnalis nymphula</foreign>) was
<foreign rend='italic'>Rapegyrne</foreign>. See Fordun, <hi rend='italic'>Scotichron.</hi>
ii. 418, quoted in Jamieson's <hi rend='italic'>Dict.
of the Scottish Language</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <q>Rapegyrne.</q></note> Lastly, a somewhat maturer,
but still youthful age is assigned to the corn-spirit by
<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>
the appellations of Bride, Oats-bride, and Wheat-bride,
which in Germany and Scotland are sometimes bestowed
both on the last sheaf and on the woman who
binds it.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Die Korndämonen</hi>,
p. 30; <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vii. 50.</note> Sometimes the idea implied in these names
is worked out more fully by representing the productive
powers of vegetation as bride and bridegroom.
Thus in some parts of Germany a man and woman
dressed in straw and called the Oats-wife and the
Oats-man, or the Oats-bride and the Oats-bridegroom
dance at the harvest festival; then the corn-stalks are
plucked from their bodies till they stand as bare as a
stubble field. In Silesia, the woman who binds the
last sheaf is called the Wheat-bride or the Oats-bride.
With the harvest crown on her head, a bridegroom by
her side, and attended by bridesmaids, she is brought
to the farmhouse with all the solemnity of a wedding
procession.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi>; Sommer,
<hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Märchen und Gebräuche aus
Sachsen und Thüringen</hi>, p. 160 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The harvest customs just described are strikingly
analogous to the spring customs which we reviewed in
the first chapter. (1.) As in the spring customs the tree-spirit
is represented both by a tree and by a person,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg083'>83</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
so in the harvest customs the corn-spirit is represented
both by the last sheaf and by the person who cuts or
binds or threshes it. The equivalence of the person to
the sheaf is shown by giving him or her the same name
as the sheaf, or <hi rend='italic'>vice versâ</hi>; by wrapping him or her in
the sheaf; and by the rule observed in some places,
that when the sheaf is called the Mother, it must be
cut by the oldest married woman; but when it is called
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
the Maiden, it must be cut by the youngest girl.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>.</note>
Here the age of the personal representative of the
corn-spirit corresponds with that of the supposed age
of the corn-spirit, just as the human victims offered by
the Mexicans to promote the growth of the maize
varied with the age of the maize.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>.</note> For in the Mexican,
as in the European, custom the human beings were
probably representatives of the corn-spirit rather than
victims offered to him. (2.) Again, the same fertilising
influence which the tree-spirit is supposed to exert over
vegetation, cattle, and even women<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> is ascribed to the
corn-spirit. Thus, its supposed influence on vegetation
is shown by the practice of taking some of the
grain of the last sheaf (in which the corn-spirit is regularly
supposed to be present), and scattering it among
the young corn in spring.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>.</note> Its influence on cattle is
shown by giving the straw of the last sheaf to the
cattle at Christmas with the express intention of making
them thrive.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>.</note> Lastly, its influence on women is
indicated by the custom of delivering the Mother-sheaf,
made into the likeness of a pregnant woman, to the
farmer's wife;<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> by the belief that the woman who binds
the last sheaf will have a child next year;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>; cp. Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Westfälische
Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen</hi>,
ii. No. 516.</note> perhaps,
too, by the idea that the person who gets it will marry
next year.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Plainly, therefore, these spring and harvest customs
are based on the same ancient modes of thought, and
form parts of the same primitive heathendom, which
was doubtless practised by our forefathers long before
the dawn of history, as it is practised to this day by
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
many of their descendants. Amongst the marks of
a primitive religion, we may note the following:&mdash;
</p>

<p>
(1.) No special class of persons is set apart for the
performance of the rites; in other words, there are no
priests. The rites may be performed by any one, as
occasion demands.
</p>

<p>
(2.) No special places are set apart for the performance
of the rites; in other words, there are no
temples. The rites may be performed anywhere, as
occasion demands.
</p>

<p>
(3.) Spirits, not gods, are recognised. (<hi rend='italic'>a.</hi>) As
distinguished from gods, spirits are restricted in their
operations to definite departments of nature. Their
names are general, not proper. Their attributes are
generic, rather than individual; in other words, there
is an indefinite number of spirits of each class, and the
individuals of a class are all much alike; they have no
definitely marked individuality; no accepted traditions
are current as to their origin, life, adventures, and
character. (<hi rend='italic'>b.</hi>) On the other hand gods, as distinguished
from spirits, are not exclusively restricted in
their operations to definite departments of nature. It
is true that there is generally some one department
over which they preside as their special province; but
they are not rigorously confined to it; they can exert
their power for good or evil in many other spheres of
nature and life. Again, they bear individual or proper
names, such as Ceres, Proserpine, Bacchus; and their
individual characters and histories are fixed by current
myths and the representations of art.
</p>

<p>
(4.) The rites are magical rather than propitiatory.
In other words, the desired objects are attained, not by
propitiating the favour of divine beings through sacrifice,
prayer, and praise, but by ceremonies which, as has
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
been explained,<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> are believed to influence the course of
nature directly through a physical sympathy or resemblance
between the rite and the effect which it is the
intention of the rite to produce.
</p>

<p>
Judged by these tests, the spring and harvest customs
of our European peasantry deserve to rank as primitive.
For no special class of persons and no special places
are set exclusively apart for their performance; they
may be performed by any one, master or man, mistress
or maid, boy or girl; they are practised, not in temples
or churches, but in the woods and meadows, beside
brooks, in barns, on harvest fields and cottage floors.
The supernatural beings whose existence is taken for
granted in them are spirits rather than deities; their
functions are limited to certain well-defined departments
of nature; their names are general, like the Barley-mother,
the Old Woman, the Maiden, not proper names
like Ceres, Proserpine, Bacchus. Their generic attributes
are known, but their individual histories and
characters are not the subject of myths. For they
exist in classes rather than as individuals, and the
members of each class are indistinguishable. For
example, every farm has its Corn-mother, or its Old
Woman, or its Maiden; but every Corn-mother is much
like every other Corn-mother, and so with the Old
Women and Maidens. Lastly, in these harvest, as in
the spring, customs, the ritual is magical rather than
propitiatory. This is shown by throwing the Corn-mother
into the river in order to secure rain and dew
for the crops;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>.</note> by making the Old Woman heavy in
order to get a heavy crop next year;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>.</note> by strewing
grain from the last sheaf amongst the young crops in
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
spring;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, cp. <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>.</note> and giving the last sheaf to the cattle to
make them thrive.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
Further, the custom of keeping the puppet&mdash;the
representative of the corn-spirit&mdash;till next harvest, is a
charm to maintain the corn-spirit in life and activity
throughout the year.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; W. Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Korndämonen</hi>, pp. 7, 26. Amongst the
Wends the last sheaf, made into a
puppet and called the Old Man, is
hung in the hall till next year's Old
Man is brought in. Schulenburg,
<hi rend='italic'>Wendisches Volksthum</hi>, p. 147. In
Inverness and Sutherland the Maiden
is kept till the next harvest. <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore
Journal</hi>, vii. 50, 53 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Cp. Kuhn,
<hi rend='italic'>Westfälische Sagen, Gebräuche und
Märchen</hi>, ii. Nos. 501, 517.</note> This is proved by a similar custom
observed by the ancient Peruvians, and thus described
by the historian Acosta. <q>They take a certain
portion of the most fruitefull of the Mays [<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> maize]
that growes in their farmes, the which they put in a
certaine granary which they doe call <foreign rend='italic'>Pirua</foreign>, with certaine
ceremonies, watching three nightes; they put this Mays
in the richest garments they have, and beeing thus
wrapped and dressed, they worship this <foreign rend='italic'>Pirua</foreign>, and
hold it in great veneration, saying it is the mother of
the mays of their inheritances, and that by this means
the mays augments and is preserved. In this moneth
[the sixth month, answering to May] they make a particular
sacrifice, and the witches demaund of this <foreign rend='italic'>Pirua</foreign>,
if it hath strength sufficient to continue untill the next
yeare; and if it answers no, then they carry this Mays to
the farme to burne, whence they brought it, according
to every man's power; then they make another <foreign rend='italic'>Pirua</foreign>,
with the same ceremonies, saying that they renue it,
to the end the seede of Mays may not perish, and if
it answers that it hath force sufficient to last longer,
they leave it untill the next yeare. This foolish vanity
continueth to this day, and it is very common amongest
the Indians to have these <foreign rend='italic'>Piruas</foreign>.</q><note place='foot'>Acosta, <hi rend='italic'>Hist. of the Indies</hi>, v. c. 28,
vol. ii. p. 374 (Hakluyt Society, 1880).</note> There seems to
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
be some error in this description of the custom. Probably
it was the dressed-up bunch of maize, not the
granary (<foreign rend='italic'>Pirua</foreign>), which was worshipped by the Peruvians
and regarded as the Mother of the Maize. This
is confirmed by what we know of the Peruvian custom
from another source. The Peruvians, we are told,
believed all useful plants to be animated by a divine
being who causes their growth. According to the
particular plant, these divine beings were called the
Maize-mother (<foreign rend='italic'>Zara-mama</foreign>), the Quinoa-mother
(<foreign rend='italic'>Quinoa-mama</foreign>), the Cocoa-mother (<foreign rend='italic'>Coca-mama</foreign>), and
the Potato-mother (<foreign rend='italic'>Axo-mama</foreign>). Figures of these
divine mothers were made respectively of ears of
maize and leaves of the quinoa and cocoa plants; they
were dressed in women's clothes and worshipped.
Thus the Maize-mother was represented by a puppet
made of stalks of maize, dressed in full female attire;
and the Indians believed that <q>as mother, it had the
power of producing and giving birth to much maize.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythol. Forsch.</hi>
p. 342 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Mannhardt's authority is a
Spanish tract (<hi rend='italic'>Carta pastoral de exortacion
e instruccion contra las idolatrias de
los Indios del arçobispado de Lima</hi>) by
Pedro de Villagomez, Archbishop of
Lima, published at Lima in 1649, and
communicated to Mannhardt by J. J.
v. Tschudi.</note>
Probably, therefore, Acosta misunderstood his informant,
and the Mother of the Maize which he describes
was not the granary (<foreign rend='italic'>Pirua</foreign>) but the bunch of maize
dressed in rich vestments. The Peruvian Mother of
the Maize, like the harvest Maiden at Balquhidder,
was kept for a year in order that by her means the
corn might grow and multiply. But lest her strength
might not suffice to last out the year, she was asked in
the course of the year how she felt, and if she answered
that she felt weak, she was burned and a fresh Mother
of the Maize made, <q>to the end the seede of Mays
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
may not perish.</q> Here, it may be observed, we have
a strong confirmation of the explanation already given
of the custom of killing the god, both periodically and
occasionally. The Mother of the Maize was allowed,
as a rule, to live through a year, that being the period
during which her strength might reasonably be supposed
to last unimpaired; but on any symptom of her
strength failing she was put to death and a fresh and
vigorous Mother of the Maize took her place, lest
the maize which depended on her for its existence
should languish and decay.
</p>

<p>
Hardly less clearly does the same train of thought
come out in the harvest customs formerly observed
by the Zapotecs of Mexico. At harvest the priests,
attended by the nobles and people, went in procession
to the maize fields, where they picked out the largest
and finest sheaf. This they took with great ceremony
to the town or village, and placed it in the temple upon
an altar adorned with wild flowers. After sacrificing
to the harvest god, the priests carefully wrapt up the
sheaf in fine linen and kept it till seed-time. Then the
priests and nobles met again at the temple, one of them
bringing the skin of a wild beast, elaborately ornamented,
in which the linen cloth containing the sheaf
was enveloped. The sheaf was then carried once
more in procession to the field from which it had been
taken. Here a small cavity or subterranean chamber
had been prepared, in which the precious sheaf was
deposited, wrapt in its various envelopes. After
sacrifice had been offered to the gods of the fields for
an abundant crop, the chamber was closed and covered
over with earth. Immediately thereafter the sowing
began. Finally, when the time of harvest drew near,
the buried sheaf was solemnly disinterred by the
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
priests, who distributed the grain to all who asked for
it. The packets of grain so distributed were carefully
preserved as talismans till the harvest.<note place='foot'>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire des
Nations civilisées du Mexique</hi>, iii. 40 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> In these
ceremonies, which continued to be annually celebrated
long after the Spanish conquest, the intention of keeping
the finest sheaf buried in the maize field from seed-time
to harvest was undoubtedly to quicken the growth
of the maize.
</p>

<p>
In the Punjaub, to the east of the Jumna, when
the cotton boles begin to burst, it is usual <q>to select
the largest plant in the field, and having sprinkled it
with butter-milk and rice-water, it is bound all over
with pieces of cotton, taken from the other plants of
the field. This selected plant is called Sirdar, or
Bhogaldaí, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi> mother-cotton, from bhogla, a name
sometimes given to a large cotton-pod, and daí (for
daiya) a mother, and after salutations are made to it,
prayers are offered that the other plants may resemble
it in the richness of their produce.</q><note place='foot'>H. M. Elliot, <hi rend='italic'>Supplemental Glossary
of Terms used in the North Western
Provinces</hi>, edited by J. Beames, i.
254.</note>
</p>

<p>
If the reader still feels any doubts as to the
original meaning of the harvest customs practised
by our peasantry, these doubts may be dispelled by
comparing the harvest customs of the Dyaks of Borneo.
At harvest the Dyaks of Northern Borneo have a
special feast, the object of which is <q>to secure the soul
of the rice, which if not so detained, the produce of
their farms would speedily rot and decay.</q> The mode
of securing the soul of the rice varies in different
tribes. Sometimes the priest catches it, in the form
of a few grains of rice, in a white cloth. Sometimes
a large shed is erected outside the village, and near it
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
is reared a high and spacious altar. The corner-posts
of the altar are lofty bamboos with leafy tops,
from one of which there hangs a long narrow streamer
of white cloth. Here gaily-dressed men and women
dance with slow and solemn steps. Suddenly the
elders and priests rush at the white streamer, seize
the end of it, and begin dancing and swaying to and
fro, amid a burst of wild music and the yells of the
spectators. An elder leaps on the altar and shakes
the bamboos violently, whereupon small stones, bunches
of hair and grains of rice fall at the feet of the dancers
and are carefully picked up by attendants. These
grains of rice are the soul of the rice. At sowing-time
some of this soul of the rice is planted with the
other seeds, <q>and is thus propagated and communicated.</q><note place='foot'>Spenser St. John, <hi rend='italic'>Life in the Forests of the Far East</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 187, 192 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
The same need of securing the soul of the
rice, if the crop is to thrive, is keenly felt by the
Karens of Burma. When a rice-field does not
flourish, they suppose that the soul (<foreign rend='italic'>kelah</foreign>) of the
rice is in some way detained from the rice. If the
soul cannot be called back, the crop will fail. The
following formula is used in recalling the <foreign rend='italic'>kelah</foreign> (soul)
of the rice: <q>O come, rice-<foreign rend='italic'>kelah</foreign>, come! Come
to the field. Come to the rice. With seed of each
gender, come. Come from the river Kho, come from
the river Kaw; from the place where they meet, come.
Come from the West, come from the East. From the
throat of the bird, from the maw of the ape, from the
throat of the elephant. Come from the sources of rivers
and their mouths. Come from the country of the
Shan and Burman. From the distant kingdoms come.
From all granaries come. O rice-<foreign rend='italic'>kelah</foreign>, come to the
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
rice.</q><note place='foot'>E. B. Cross, <q>On the Karens,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the American Oriental
Society</hi>, iv. 309.</note> Again, the European custom of representing the
corn-spirit in the double form of bride and bridegroom<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref>.</note>
is paralleled by a custom observed at the rice-harvest
in Java. Before the reapers begin to cut the rice, the
priest or sorcerer picks out a number of ears of rice,
which are tied together, smeared with ointment, and
adorned with flowers. Thus decked out, the ears are
called the <foreign rend='italic'>padi-pëngantèn</foreign>, that is, the Rice-bride and
the Rice-bridegroom; their wedding feast is celebrated,
and the cutting of the rice begins immediately afterwards.
Later on, when the rice is being got in, a
bridal chamber is partitioned off in the barn, and
furnished with a new mat, a lamp, and all kinds of
toilet articles. Sheaves of rice, to represent the
wedding guests, are placed beside the Rice-bride
and the Rice-bridegroom. Not till this has been
done may the whole harvest be housed in the barn.
And for the first forty days after the rice has been
housed, no one may enter the barn, for fear of disturbing
the newly-wedded pair.<note place='foot'>Veth, <hi rend='italic'>Java</hi>, i. 524-526.</note>
</p>

<p>
Compared with the Corn-mother of Germany and
the harvest Maiden of Balquhidder, the Demeter and
Proserpine of Greece are late products of religious
growth. But, as Aryans, the Greeks must at one time
or another have observed harvest customs like those
which are still practised by Celts, Teutons, and Slavs,
and which, far beyond the limits of the Aryan world,
have been practised by the Incas of Peru, the Dyaks
of Borneo, and the Malays of Java&mdash;a sufficient proof
that the ideas on which these customs rest are not confined
to any one race, but naturally suggest themselves
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
to all untutored peoples engaged in agriculture. It is
probable, therefore, that Demeter and Proserpine,
those stately and beautiful figures of Greek mythology,
grew out of the same simple beliefs and practices
which still prevail among our modern peasantry, and
that they were represented by rude dolls made out
of the yellow sheaves on many a harvest-field long
before their breathing images were wrought in bronze
and marble by the master hands of Phidias and Praxiteles.
A reminiscence of that olden time&mdash;a scent, so
to say, of the harvest-field&mdash;lingered to the last in the
title of the Maiden (<foreign lang='el' rend='italic'>Kore</foreign>) by which Proserpine was
commonly known. Thus if the prototype of Demeter
is the Corn-mother of Germany, the prototype of
Proserpine is the harvest Maiden, which, autumn after
autumn, is still made from the last sheaf on the Braes
of Balquhidder. Indeed if we knew more about the
peasant-farmers of ancient Greece we should probably
find that even in classical times they continued
annually to fashion their Corn-mothers (Demeters)
and Maidens (Proserpines) out of the ripe corn on
the harvest fields. But unfortunately the Demeter
and Proserpine whom we know are the denizens of
towns, the majestic inhabitants of lordly temples;
it was for such divinities alone that the refined
writers of antiquity had eyes; the rude rites performed
by rustics amongst the corn were beneath
their notice. Even if they noticed them, they probably
never dreamed of any connection between the
puppet of corn-stalks on the sunny stubble-field and
the marble divinity in the shady coolness of the temple.
Still the writings even of these town-bred and cultured
persons afford us an occasional glimpse of a Demeter
as rude as the rudest that a remote German village
<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>
can show. Thus the story that Iasion begat a child
Plutus (<q>wealth,</q> <q>abundance</q>) by Demeter on a
thrice-ploughed field,<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Od.</hi> v. 125 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Hesiod,
<hi rend='italic'>Theog.</hi> 969 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> may be compared with the West
Prussian custom of the mock birth of a child on the
harvest field.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In this Prussian custom the pretended
mother represents the Corn-mother (<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Žytniamatka</foreign>);
the pretended child represents the Corn-baby, and
the whole ceremony is a charm to ensure a crop
next year.<note place='foot'>It is possible that a ceremony performed
in a Cyprian worship of Ariadne
may have been of this nature. Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Theseus</hi>, 20, ἐν δὴ τῇ θυσίᾳ τοῦ
Γορπιαίου μηνὸς ἱσταμένου δευτέρα κατακλινόμενον
τινα τῶν νεανίσκων φθέγγεσθαι
καὶ ποιεῖν ἄπερ ὠδινοῦσαι γυναῖκες. We
have already seen grounds for regarding
Ariadne as a goddess or spirit of vegetation
(above, p. 104). If, however, the
reference is to the Syro-Macedonian
calendar, in which Gorpiaeus corresponds
to September (Daremberg et
Saglio, i. 831), the ceremony could
not have been a harvest celebration, but
may have been a vintage one. Amongst
the Minnitarees in North America, the
Prince of Neuwied saw a tall strong
woman pretend to bring up a stalk of
maize out of her stomach; the object
of the ceremony was to secure a good
crop of maize in the following year.
Maximilian, Prinz zu Wied, <hi rend='italic'>Reise in
das innere Nord-Amerika</hi>, ii. 269.</note> There are other folk-customs, observed
both in spring and at harvest, with which
the legend of the begetting of the child Plutus
is probably still more intimately connected. Their
general purport is to impart fertility to the fields by
performing, or at least mimicking, upon them the process
of procreation.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Baumkultus</hi>, pp.
468 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, 480 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Antike Wald- und
Feldkulte</hi>, p. 288 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, pp. 146 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, 340
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Van Hoëvell, <hi rend='italic'>Ambon en de Oeliasers</hi>,
p. 62 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Wilken, in <hi rend='italic'>Indische
Gids</hi>, June 1884, pp. 958, 963 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> Cp.
Marco Polo, trans. Yule,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> i. 212 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Another glimpse of the savage
under the civilised Demeter will be afforded farther
on, when we come to deal with another aspect of these
agricultural divinities.
</p>

<p>
The reader may have observed that in modern
folk-customs the corn-spirit is generally represented
either by a Corn-mother (Old Woman, etc.) or by a
Maiden (Corn-baby, etc.), not both by a Corn-mother
<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>
and by a Maiden. Why then did the Greeks represent
the corn both as a mother and a daughter? In
the Breton custom the mother-sheaf&mdash;a large figure
made out of the last sheaf with a small corn-doll inside
of it&mdash;clearly represents both the Corn-mother and the
Corn-daughter, the latter still unborn.<note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, in the
Prussian custom just described, the woman who plays
the part of Corn-mother represents the ripe corn; the
child appears to represent next year's corn, which may
be regarded, naturally enough, as the child of this
year's corn, since it is from the seed of this year's
harvest that next year's corn will spring. Demeter
would thus be the ripe corn of this year; Proserpine
the seed-corn taken from it and sown in autumn, to
reappear in spring. The descent of Proserpine into
the lower world<note place='foot'>Cp. Preller, <hi rend='italic'>Griech. Mythol.</hi><hi rend='vertical-align: super'>3</hi> i.
628, <hi rend='italic'>note 3</hi>. In Greece the annual descent
of Proserpine appears to have
taken place at the Great Eleusinian
Mysteries and at the Thesmophoria,
that is, about the time of the autumn
sowing. But in Sicily her descent
seems to have been celebrated when
the corn was fully ripe (Diodorus, v. 4),
that is, in summer.</note> would thus be a mythical expression
for the sowing of the seed; her reappearance
in spring<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Demeter</hi>, 401
<hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Preller, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> would express the sprouting of the young
corn. Thus the Proserpine of this year becomes
the Demeter of the next, and this may very well
have been the original form of the myth. But
when with the advance of religious thought the
corn came to be personified, no longer as a being
that went through the whole cycle of birth, growth,
reproduction, and death within a year, but as an
immortal goddess, consistency requires that one of
the two personifications, the mother or the daughter,
should be sacrificed. But the double conception of
the corn as mother and daughter was too old and too
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
deeply rooted in the popular mind to be eradicated by
logic, and so room had to be found in the reformed
myth both for mother and daughter. This was done
by assigning to Proserpine the rôle of the corn sown in
autumn and sprouting in spring, while Demeter was
left to play the somewhat vague and ill-defined part of
mother of the corn, who laments its annual disappearance
underground, and rejoices over its reappearance
in spring. Thus instead of a regular succession of
divine beings, each living a year and then giving birth
to her successor, the reformed myth exhibits the conception
of two divine and immortal beings, one of
whom annually disappears into and reappears from the
ground, while the other has little to do but to weep
and rejoice at the appropriate times.
</p>

<p>
This explanation of the double personification of
the corn in Greek myth assumes that both personifications
(Demeter and Proserpine) are original.
But if we assume that the Greek myth started with a
single personification, the after-growth of a second
personification may perhaps be explained as follows.
On looking over the peasant harvest customs which
have been passed under review, it may be noticed that
they involve two distinct conceptions of the corn-spirit.
For whereas in some of the customs the corn-spirit
is treated as immanent in the corn, in others it is
regarded as external to it. Thus when a particular
sheaf is called by the name of the corn-spirit, and
is dressed in clothes and treated with reverence,<note place='foot'>In some places it was customary
to kneel down before the last sheaf, in
others to kiss it. W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Korndämonen</hi>,
26; <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mytholog. Forschungen</hi>,
p. 339; <hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vi.
270.</note>
the corn-spirit is clearly regarded as immanent in
the corn. But when the corn-spirit is said to make
<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>
the corn grow by passing through it, or to blight the
corn of those against whom she has a grudge,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> she
is clearly conceived as quite separate from, though
exercising power over, the corn. Conceived in the
latter way the corn-spirit is in a fair way to become a
deity of the corn, if she has not become so already.
Of these two conceptions, that of the corn-spirit as
immanent in the corn is doubtless the older, since the
view of nature as animated by indwelling spirits
appears to have generally preceded the view of it as
controlled by deities external to it; to put it shortly,
animism precedes deism. In the harvest customs of
our European peasantry the conception of the corn-spirit
as immanent appears to be the prevalent one;
the conception of it as external occurs rather as an
exception. In Greek mythology, on the other hand,
Demeter is distinctly conceived in the latter way; she
is the deity of the corn rather than the spirit immanent
in it.<note place='foot'>In the Homeric Hymn to Demeter,
she is represented as controlling the
growth of the corn. See above, p. <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>.</note> The process of thought which seems to be
chiefly instrumental in producing the transition from
the one mode of conception to the other is anthropomorphism,
or the gradual investment of the immanent
spirits with more and more of the attributes of
humanity. As men emerge from savagery the tendency
to anthropomorphise or humanise their divinities
gains strength; and the more anthropomorphic these
become, the wider is the breach which severs them
from those natural objects of which they were at first
merely the animating spirits or souls. But in the
progress upwards from savagery, men of the same
generation do not march abreast; and though the
anthropomorphic gods may satisfy the religious wants
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
of more advanced individuals, the more backward
members of the community will cling by preference to
the older animistic notions. Now when the spirit of
any natural object (as the corn) has been invested with
human qualities, detached from the object, and converted
into a deity controlling it, the object itself is, by
the withdrawal of its spirit, left inanimate, it becomes,
so to say, a spiritual vacuum. But the popular fancy,
intolerant of such a vacuum, in other words, unable to
conceive anything as inanimate, immediately creates a
fresh mythical being, with which it peoples the vacant
object. Thus the same natural object is now represented
in mythology by two separate beings; first, by
the old spirit now separated from it and raised to the
rank of a deity; second, by the new spirit, freshly
created by the popular fancy to supply the place
vacated by the old spirit on its elevation to a higher
sphere. The problem for mythology now is, having
got two separate personifications of the same object,
what to do with them? How are their relations to
each other to be adjusted, and room found for both in
the mythological system? When the old spirit or new
deity is conceived as creating or producing the object
in question, the problem is easily solved. Since the
object is believed to be produced by the old spirit, and
animated by the new one, the latter, as the soul of the
object, must also owe its existence to the former; thus
the old spirit will stand to the new one as producer to
produced, that is (in mythology), as parent to child,
and if both spirits are conceived as female, their relation
will be that of mother and daughter. In this way, starting
from a single personification of the corn as female,
mythology might in time reach a double personification
of it as mother and daughter. It would be very rash
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
to affirm that this was the way in which the myth of
Demeter and Proserpine actually took shape; but it
seems a legitimate conjecture that the reduplication of
deities, of which Demeter and Proserpine furnish an
example, may sometimes have arisen in the way indicated.
For example, among the pairs of deities whom
we have been considering, it has been shown that
there are grounds for regarding both Isis and her
companion god Osiris as personifications of the corn.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg305'>305</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note>
On the hypothesis just suggested, Isis would be the
old corn-spirit, and Osiris would be the newer one,
whose relationship to the old spirit was variously
explained as that of brother, husband, and son;<note place='foot'>Pauly, <hi rend='italic'>Real-Encyclopadie der class</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Alterthumswiss.</hi> v. 1011.</note> for
of course mythology would always be free to account
for the coexistence of the two divinities in more ways
than one. Further, this hypothesis offers at least a
possible explanation of the relation of Virbius to
the Arician Diana. The latter, as we have seen,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
was a tree-goddess; and if, as I have conjectured,
the Flamen Virbialis was no other than the priest
of Nemi himself, that is, the King of the Wood,
Virbius must also have been a tree-spirit. On the
present hypothesis he was the newer tree-spirit,
whose relation to the old tree-spirit (Diana) was explained
by representing him as her favourite or
lover. It must not, however, be forgotten that this
proposed explanation of such pairs of deities as
Demeter and Proserpine, Isis and Osiris, Diana and
Virbius, is purely conjectural, and is only given for
what it is worth.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>

<div>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf' level1='9. Lityerses.'/>
<head>§ 9.&mdash;Lityerses.</head>

<p>
In the preceding pages an attempt has been made
to show that in the Corn-mother and harvest Maiden of
Northern Europe we have the prototypes of Demeter
and Proserpine. But an essential feature is still wanting
to complete the resemblance. A leading incident
in the Greek myth is the death and resurrection of
Proserpine; it is this incident which, coupled with the
nature of the goddess as a deity of vegetation, links
the myth with the cults of Adonis, Attis, Osiris, and
Dionysus; and it is in virtue of this incident that the
myth is considered in this chapter. It remains, therefore,
to see whether the conception of the annual death
and resurrection of a god, which figures so prominently
in these great Greek and Oriental worships, has not
also its origin in the rustic rites observed by reapers
and vine-dressers amongst the corn-shocks and the
vines.
</p>

<p>
Our general ignorance of the popular superstitions
and customs of the ancients has already been
confessed. But the obscurity which thus hangs
over the first beginnings of ancient religion is fortunately
dissipated to some extent in the present case.
The worships of Osiris, Adonis, and Attis had their respective
seats, as we have seen, in Egypt, Syria, and
Phrygia; and in each of these countries certain harvest
and vintage customs are known to have been observed,
the resemblance of which to each other and to the
national rites struck the ancients themselves, and, compared
with the harvest customs of modern peasants and
barbarians, seem to throw some light on the origin of
the rites in question.
</p>

<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>

<p>
It has been already mentioned, on the authority of
Diodorus, that in ancient Egypt the reapers were
wont to lament over the first sheaf cut, invoking
Isis as the goddess to whom they owed the discovery
of corn.<note place='foot'>Diodorus, i. 14, ἔτι γὰρ καὶ νῦν
κατὰ τὸν θερισμόν τούς πρώτους ἀμηθέντας
στάχυς θέντας τοὺς ἀνθρώπους κόπτεσθαι
πλησίον τοῦ δράγματοσ κ.τ.λ. For θέντας
we should perhaps read σύνθεντας, which
is supported by the following δράγματος.</note> To the plaintive song or cry sung or uttered
by Egyptian reapers the Greeks gave the name of
Maneros, and explained the name by a story that
Maneros, the only son of the first Egyptian king,
invented agriculture, and, dying an untimely death, was
thus lamented by the people.<note place='foot'>Herodotus, ii. 79; Pollux, iv. 54;
Pausanias, ix. 29; Athenaeus, 620 A.</note> It appears, however, that
the name Maneros is due to a misunderstanding of the
formula <foreign rend='italic'>mââ-ne-hra</foreign>, <q>come thou back,</q> which has been
discovered in various Egyptian writings, for example
in the dirge of Isis in the Book of the Dead.<note place='foot'>Brugsch, <hi rend='italic'>Adonisklage und Linoslied</hi>,
p. 24.</note> Hence
we may suppose that the cry <foreign rend='italic'>mââ-ne-hra</foreign> was chanted
by the reapers over the cut corn as a dirge for the
death of the corn-spirit (Isis or Osiris) and a prayer
for its return. As the cry was raised over the first ears
reaped, it would seem that the corn-spirit was believed
by the Egyptians to be present in the first corn cut and
to die under the sickle. We have seen that in Java
the first ears of rice are taken to represent the Corn-bride
and the Corn-bridegroom.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref>.</note> In parts of Russia
the first sheaf is treated much in the same way that
the last sheaf is treated elsewhere. It is reaped by the
mistress herself, taken home and set in the place of
honour near the holy pictures; afterwards it is threshed
separately, and some of its grain is mixed with the
next year's seed-corn.<note place='foot'>Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the Russian
People</hi>, p. 249 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>

<p>
In Phoenicia and Western Asia a plaintive song, like
that chanted by the Egyptian corn-reapers, was sung
at the vintage and probably (to judge by analogy) also
at harvest. This Phoenician song was called by the
Greeks Linus or Ailinus and explained, like Maneros,
as a lament for the death of a youth named Linus.<note place='foot'>Homer, <hi rend='italic'>Il.</hi> xviii. 570; Herodotus,
ii. 79; Pausanias, ix. 29; Conon,
<hi rend='italic'>Narrat.</hi> 19. For the form Ailinus
see Suidas, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi>; Euripides, <hi rend='italic'>Orestes</hi>,
1395; Sophocles, <hi rend='italic'>Ajax</hi>, 627. Cp.
Moschus, <hi rend='italic'>Idyl.</hi> iii. 1; Callimachus,
<hi rend='italic'>Hymn to Apollo</hi>, 20.</note>
According to one story Linus was brought up by a
shepherd, but torn to pieces by his dogs.<note place='foot'>Conon, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> But, like
Maneros, the name Linus or Ailinus appears to have
originated in a verbal misunderstanding, and to be
nothing more than the cry <foreign rend='italic'>ai lanu</foreign>, that is <q>woe to us,</q>
which the Phoenicians probably uttered in mourning
for Adonis;<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>A. W. F.</hi> p. 281.</note> at least Sappho seems to have regarded
Adonis and Linus as equivalent.<note place='foot'>Pausanias, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In Bithynia a like mournful ditty, called Bormus
or Borimus, was chanted by Mariandynian reapers.
Bormus was said to have been a handsome youth, the
son of King Upias or of a wealthy and distinguished
man. One summer day, watching the reapers at work
in his fields, he went to fetch them a drink of water
and was never heard of more. So the reapers sought
for him, calling him in plaintive strains, which they
continued to use ever afterwards.<note place='foot'>Pollux, iv. 54; Athenaeus, 619 <hi rend='smallcaps'>f</hi>,
620 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>; Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>svv.</hi> Βῶρμον and
Μαριανδυνὸς θρῆνος.</note>
</p>

<p>
In Phrygia the corresponding song, sung by
harvesters both at reaping and at threshing, was called
Lityerses. According to one story, Lityerses was a
bastard son of Midas, King of Phrygia. He used to
reap the corn, and had an enormous appetite. When
a stranger happened to enter the corn-field or to pass
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
by it, Lityerses gave him plenty to eat and drink, then
took him to the corn-fields on the banks of the Maeander
and compelled him to reap along with him. Lastly,
he used to wrap the stranger in a sheaf, cut off his
head with a sickle, and carry away his body, wrapt
in the corn stalks. But at last he was himself slain by
Hercules, who threw his body into the river.<note place='foot'>The story was told by Sositheus in
his play of <hi rend='italic'>Daphnis</hi>. His verses have
been preserved in the tract of an anonymous
writer. See <hi rend='italic'>Scriptores rerum
mirabilium</hi>, ed. Westermann, p. 220;
also Athenaeus, 415 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b</hi>; Schol. on
Theocritus, x. 41; Photius, Suidas,
and Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Lityerses</hi>; Apostolius,
x. 74. Photius mentions the
sickle. Lityerses is the subject of a
special study by Mannhardt (<hi rend='italic'>Mythologische
Forschungen</hi>, p. 1 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>), whom
I follow.</note> As
Hercules was probably reported to have slain Lityerses
in the same way that Lityerses slew others (as Theseus
treated Sinis and Sciron), we may infer that Lityerses
used to throw the bodies of his victims into the river.
According to another version of the story, Lityerses, a
son of Midas, used to challenge people to a reaping
match with him, and if he vanquished them he used to
thrash them; but one day he met with a stronger
reaper, who slew him.<note place='foot'>Pollux, iv. 54.</note>
</p>

<p>
There are some grounds for supposing that in these
stories of Lityerses we have the description of a
Phrygian harvest custom in accordance with which
certain persons, especially strangers passing the harvest
field, were regularly regarded as embodiments of the
corn-spirit and as such were seized by the reapers,
wrapt in sheaves, and beheaded, their bodies, bound up
in the corn-stalks, being afterwards thrown into water
as a rain-charm. The grounds for this supposition are,
first, the resemblance of the Lityerses story to the harvest
customs of European peasantry, and, second, the fact
that human beings have been commonly killed by
savage races to promote the fertility of the fields. We
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
will examine these grounds successively, beginning with
the former.
</p>

<p>
In comparing the story with the harvest customs
of Europe,<note place='foot'>In this comparison I closely follow
Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Myth. Forsch.</hi> p. 18 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> three points deserve special attention,
namely: I. the reaping match and the binding of
persons in the sheaves; II. the killing of the corn-spirit
or his representatives; III. the treatment of
visitors to the harvest-field or of strangers passing it.
</p>

<p>
I. In regard to the first head, we have seen that
in modern Europe the person who cuts or binds or
threshes the last sheaf is often exposed to rough treatment
at the hands of his fellow-labourers. For example,
he is bound up in the last sheaf, and, thus encased, is
carried or carted about, beaten, drenched with water,
thrown on a dunghill, etc. Or, if he is spared this
horseplay, he is at least the subject of ridicule or is
believed destined to suffer some misfortune in the
course of the year. Hence the harvesters are
naturally reluctant to give the last cut at reaping or
the last stroke at threshing or to bind the last sheaf,
and towards the close of the work this reluctance produces
an emulation among the labourers, each striving
to finish his task as fast as possible, in order that he
may escape the invidious distinction of being last.<note place='foot'>Cp. above, p. <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>. On the other
hand, the last sheaf is sometimes an
object of desire and emulation. See
p. 336. It is so at Balquhidder also,
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore Journal</hi>, vi. 269; and it was
formerly so on the Gareloch, Dumbartonshire,
where there was a competition
for the honour of cutting it, several
handfuls of standing corn being concealed
under sheaves.&mdash;(From the information
of Archie Leitch. See note
on p. <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>).</note>
For example, in the neighbourhood of Danzig,
when the winter corn is cut and mostly bound up in
sheaves, the portion which still remains to be bound is
divided amongst the women binders, each of whom
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
receives a swath of equal length to bind. A crowd of
reapers, children, and idlers gathers round to witness
the contest, and at the word, <q>Seize the Old Man,</q> the
women fall to work, all binding their allotted swaths as
hard as they can. The spectators watch them narrowly,
and the woman who cannot keep pace with the rest
and consequently binds the last sheaf has to carry the
Old Man (that is, the last sheaf made up in the form
of a man) to the farmhouse and deliver it to the farmer
with the words, <q>Here I bring you the Old Man.</q> At
the supper which follows, the Old Man is placed at the
table and receives an abundant portion of food which,
as he cannot eat it, falls to the share of the woman who
carried him. Afterwards the Old Man is placed in the
yard and all the people dance round him. Or the woman
who bound the last sheaf dances for a good while with
the Old Man, while the rest form a ring round them;
afterwards they all, one after the other, dance a single
round with him. Further, the woman who bound the
last sheaf goes herself by the name of the Old Man till
the next harvest, and is often mocked with the cry,
<q>Here comes the Old Man.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Myth. Forsch.</hi> p. 19 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Aschbach, Bavaria,
when the reaping is nearly finished, the reapers say,
<q>Now we will drive out the Old Man.</q> Each of them
sets himself to reap a patch of corn and reaps as fast as
he can; he who cuts the last handful or the last stalk is
greeted by the rest with an exulting cry, <q>You have
the Old Man.</q> Sometimes a black mask is fastened
on the reaper's face and he is dressed in woman's
clothes; or if the reaper is a woman, she is dressed in
man's clothes; a dance follows. At the supper the
Old Man gets twice as large a portion of food as the
others. At threshing, the proceedings are the same;
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
the person who gives the last stroke is said to have the
Old Man.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Myth. Forsch.</hi> p.
20; Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. 217.</note>
</p>

<p>
These examples illustrate the contests in reaping,
threshing, and binding which take place amongst the
harvesters, on account of their unwillingness to suffer
the ridicule and personal inconvenience attaching to
the individual who happens to finish his work last.
It will be remembered that the person who is last at
reaping, binding, or threshing, is regarded as the
representative of the corn-spirit,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> and this idea is
more fully expressed by binding him or her in corn-stalks.
The latter custom has been already illustrated,
but a few more instances may be added. At Kloxin,
near Stettin, the harvesters call out to the woman who
binds the last sheaf, <q>You have the Old Man, and
must keep him.</q> The Old Man is a great bundle of
corn decked with flowers and ribbons, and fashioned
into a rude semblance of the human form. It is
fastened on a rake or strapped on a horse, and brought
with music to the village. In delivering the Old Man
to the farmer, the woman says&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Here, dear Sir, is the Old Man.</q></l>
<l>He can stay no longer on the field,</l>
<l>He can hide himself no longer,</l>
<l>He must come into the village.</l>
<l>Ladies and gentlemen, pray be so kind</l>
<l><q rend='post'>As to give the Old Man a present.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Forty or fifty years ago the custom was to tie up
the woman herself in pease-straw, and bring her with
music to the farmhouse, where the harvesters danced
with her till the pease-straw fell off.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Myth. Forsch.</hi>
p. 22.</note> In other villages
round Stettin, when the last harvest-waggon is being
loaded, there is a regular race amongst the women,
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
each striving not to be last. For she who places
the last sheaf on the waggon is called the Old Man,
and is completely swathed in corn-stalks; she is also
decked with flowers, and flowers and a helmet of straw
are placed on her head. In solemn procession she
carries the harvest-crown to the squire, over whose
head she holds it while she utters a string of good
wishes. At the dance which follows, the Old Man
has the right to choose his (or rather her) partner;
it is an honour to dance with him.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Myth. Forsch.</hi> p. 22.</note> At Blankenfelde,
in the district of Potsdam, the woman who binds the
last sheaf at the rye-harvest is saluted with the cry,
<q>You have the Old Man.</q> A woman is then tied
up in the last sheaf in such a way that only her
head is left free; her hair also is covered with a
cap made of rye-stalks, adorned with ribbons and
flowers. She is called the Harvest-man, and must keep
dancing in front of the last harvest-waggon till it reaches
the squire's house, where she receives a present, and is
released from her envelope of corn.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 22 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Gommern,
near Magdeburg, the reaper who cuts the last ears
of corn is often wrapt up in corn-stalks so completely
that it is hard to see whether there is a man in the
bundle or not. Thus wrapt up he is taken by another
stalwart reaper on his back, and carried round the
field amid the joyous cries of the harvesters.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 23.</note> At
Neuhausen, near Merseburg, the person who binds the
last sheaf is wrapt in ears of oats and saluted as
the Oats-man, whereupon the others dance round
him.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Brie, Isle de France, the farmer himself
is tied up in the <emph>first</emph> sheaf.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 24.</note> At the harvest-home
at Udvarhely, Transylvania, a person is encased in
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
corn-stalks, and wears on his head a crown made
out of the last ears cut. On reaching the village
he is soused with water over and over.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Myth. Forsch.</hi> p. 24.</note> At
Dingelstedt, in the district of Erfurt, about fifty
years ago it was the custom to tie up a man in
the last sheaf. He was called the Old Man, and
was brought home on the last waggon, amid huzzas
and music. On reaching the farmyard he was rolled
round the barn and drenched with water.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 24.</note> At
Nördlingen, Bavaria, the man who gives the last
stroke at threshing is wrapt in straw and rolled on
the threshing-floor.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 24 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In some parts of Oberpfalz,
Bavaria, he is said to <q>get the Old Man,</q> is wrapt
in straw, and carried to a neighbour who has not
yet finished his threshing.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 25.</note> In Thüringen a sausage
is stuck in the last sheaf at threshing, and thrown,
with the sheaf, on the threshing-floor. It is called
the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Barrenwurst</foreign> or <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Banzenwurst</foreign>, and is eaten by all
the threshers. After they have eaten it a man is
encased in pease-straw, and thus attired is led through
the village.<note place='foot'>Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und
Gebräuche aus Thüringen</hi>, p. 223.</note>
</p>

<p>
<q>In all these cases the idea is that the spirit of
the corn&mdash;the Old Man of vegetation&mdash;is driven out
of the corn last cut or last threshed, and lives in
the barn during the winter. At sowing-time he goes
out again to the fields to resume his activity as
animating force among the sprouting corn.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 25 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
Much the same ideas are attached to the last corn
in India; for we are told that in the Central Provinces,
<q>when the reaping is nearly done, about a <foreign rend='italic'>bisvá</foreign>, say
a rood of land, of corn is left standing in the cultivator's
<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>
last field, and the reapers rest a little. Then
they rush at this <foreign rend='italic'>bisvá</foreign>, tear it up, and cast it into the
air, shouting victory to Omkár Maháráj or Jhámájí,
or Rámjí Dás, etc., according to their respective
possessions. A sheaf is made up of this corn, tied
to a bamboo, and stuck up in the last harvest cart, and
carried home in triumph. It is fastened up in the
threshing-floor to a tree, or to the cattle-shed, where
its services are essential in averting the evil-eye.</q><note place='foot'>C. A. Elliot, <hi rend='italic'>Hoshangábád Settlement
Report</hi>, p. 178, quoted in <hi rend='italic'>Panjab
Notes and Queries</hi>, iii. Nos. 8, 168.</note>
</p>

<p>
II. Passing to the second point of comparison
between the Lityerses story and European harvest
customs, we have now to see that in the latter the corn-spirit
is often believed to be killed at reaping or threshing.
In the Romsdal and other parts of Norway, when
the haymaking is over, the people say that <q>the Old
Hay-man has been killed.</q> In some parts of Bavaria
the man who gives the last stroke at threshing is said
to have killed the Corn-man, the Oats-man, or the
Wheat-man, according to the crop.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Myth. Forsch.</hi> p.
31.</note> In the Canton of
Tillot, in Lothringen, at threshing the last corn the
men keep time with their flails, calling out as they
thresh, <q>We are killing the Old Woman! We are
killing the Old Woman!</q> If there is an old woman
in the house she is warned to save herself, or she will
be struck dead.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 334.</note> In Lithuania, near Ragnit, the last
handful of corn is left standing by itself, with the
words, <q>The Old Woman (<foreign rend='italic'>Boba</foreign>) is sitting in there.</q>
Then a young reaper whets his scythe, and, with a
strong sweep, cuts down the handful. It is now said
of him that <q>He has cut off the Boba's head;</q> and he
receives a gratuity from the farmer and a jugful of
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
water over his head from the farmer's wife.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Myth. Forsch.</hi>
p. 330.</note> According
to another account, every Lithuanian reaper makes haste
to finish his task; for the Old Rye-woman lives in the
last stalks, and whoever cuts the last stalks kills the Old
Rye-woman, and by killing her he brings trouble on
himself.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi></note> In Wilkischken (district of Tilsit) the man
who cuts the last corn goes by the name of <q>The killer
of the Rye-woman.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 331.</note> In Lithuania, again, the corn-spirit
is believed to be killed at threshing as well as at
reaping. When only a single pile of corn remains to be
threshed, all the threshers suddenly step back a few
paces, as if at the word of command. Then they fall
to work plying their flails with the utmost rapidity
and vehemence, till they come to the last bundle.
Upon this they fling themselves with almost frantic
fury, straining every nerve, and raining blows on it till
the word <q>Halt!</q> rings out sharply from the leader.
The man whose flail is the last to fall after the
command to stop has been given is immediately
surrounded by all the rest, crying out that <q>He has
struck the Old Rye-woman dead.</q> He has to expiate
the deed by treating them to brandy; and, like the
man who cuts the last corn, he is known as <q>The
killer of the Old Rye-woman.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 335.</note> Sometimes in
Lithuania the slain corn-spirit was represented by a
puppet. Thus a female figure was made out of
corn-stalks, dressed in clothes, and placed on the
threshing-floor, under the heap of corn which was to
be threshed last. Whoever thereafter gave the
last stroke at threshing <q>struck the Old Woman
dead.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 335.</note> We have already had examples of burning
the figure which represents the corn-spirit.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref>.</note> Sometimes,
<pb n='374'/><anchor id='Pg374'/>
again, the corn-spirit is represented by a man,
who lies down under the last corn; it is threshed
upon his body, and the people say that <q>the Old
Man is being beaten to death.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Korndäm.</hi>, p. 26.</note> We have already
seen that sometimes the farmer's wife is thrust,
together with the last sheaf, under the threshing-machine,
as if to thresh her, and that afterwards a
pretence is made of winnowing her.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>.</note> At Volders,
in the Tyrol, husks of corn are stuck behind the neck
of the man who gives the last stroke at threshing, and
he is throttled with a straw garland. If he is tall, it is
believed that the corn will be tall next year. Then he
is tied on a bundle and flung into the river.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 50.</note> In
Carinthia, the thresher who gave the last stroke, and
the person who untied the last sheaf on the threshing-floor,
are bound hand and foot with straw bands, and
crowns of straw are placed on their heads. Then
they are tied, face to face, on a sledge, dragged
through the village, and flung into a brook.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 50 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The
custom of throwing the representative of the corn-spirit
into a stream, like that of drenching him with
water, is, as usual, a rain-charm.<note place='foot'>See above, pp. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>,
<ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref>.</note>
</p>

<p>
III. Thus far the representatives of the corn-spirit
have generally been the man or woman who
cuts, binds, or threshes the last corn. We now come
to the cases in which the corn-spirit is represented
either by a stranger passing the harvest-field (as in the
Lityerses tale), or by a visitor entering it for the first
time. All over Germany it is customary for the
reapers or threshers to lay hold of passing strangers
and bind them with a rope made of corn-stalks, till
<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>
they pay a forfeit; and when the farmer himself or one
of his guests enters the field or the threshing-floor for
the first time, he is treated in the same way. Sometimes
the rope is only tied round his arm or his feet
or his neck.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 32 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>
Cp. <hi rend='italic'>Revue des Traditions populaires</hi>, iii.
598.</note> But sometimes he is regularly swathed
in corn. Thus at Solör in Norway, whoever enters
the field, be he the master or a stranger, is tied up
in a sheaf and must pay a ransom. In the neighbourhood
of Soest, when the farmer visits the
flax-pullers for the first time, he is completely
enveloped in flax. Passers-by are also surrounded by
the women, tied up in flax, and compelled to stand
brandy.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Mythol. Forsch.</hi> p.
35 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> At Nördlingen strangers are caught with
straw ropes and tied up in a sheaf till they pay a
forfeit. At Brie, Isle de France, when any one who
does not belong to the farm passes by the harvest-field,
the reapers give chase. If they catch him, they bind
him in a sheaf and bite him, one after the other, in the
forehead, crying <q>You shall carry the key of the
field.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 36.</note> <q>To have the key</q> is an expression used
by harvesters elsewhere in the sense of to cut or bind
or thresh the last sheaf;<note place='foot'>For the evidence, see <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> p. 36,
<hi rend='italic'>note</hi> 2. The idea which lies at the
bottom of the phrase seems to be
explained by the following Cingalese
custom. <q>There is a curious custom
of the threshing-floor called <q>Goigote</q>&mdash;the
tying of the cultivator's knot.
When a sheaf of corn has been threshed
out, before it is removed the grain is
heaped up and the threshers, generally
six in number, sit round it, and taking
a few stalks, with the ears of corn
attached, jointly tie a knot and bury it
in the heap. It is left there until all
the sheaves have been threshed and the
corn winnowed and measured. The
object of this ceremony is to prevent
the devils from diminishing the quantity
of corn in the heap.</q> C. J. R. Le
Mesurier, <q>Customs and Superstitions
connected with the Cultivation of Rice
in the Southern Province of Ceylon,</q>
in <hi rend='italic'>Journal of the Royal Asiatic Society</hi>,
N.S., xvii. (1885) 371. The <q>key</q> in
the European custom is probably intended
to serve the same purpose
as the <q>knot</q> in the Cingalese
custom.</note> hence, it is equivalent to
the phrases <q>You have the Old Man,</q> <q>You are the
<pb n='376'/><anchor id='Pg376'/>
Old Man,</q> which are addressed to the cutter, binder,
or thresher of the last sheaf. Therefore, when a
stranger, as at Brie, is tied up in a sheaf and told that
he will <q>carry the key of the field,</q> it is as much
as to say that he is the Old Man, that is, an embodiment
of the corn-spirit.
</p>

<p>
Thus, like Lityerses, modern reapers lay hold of
a passing stranger and tie him up in a sheaf. It is
not to be expected that they should complete the
parallel by cutting off his head; but if they do not
take such a strong step, their language and gestures
are at least indicative of a desire to do so. For
instance, in Mecklenburg on the first clay of reaping, if
the master or mistress or a stranger enters the field, or
merely passes by it, all the mowers face towards him
and sharpen their scythes, clashing their whet-stones
against them in unison, as if they were making ready
to mow. Then the woman who leads the mowers
steps up to him and ties a band round his left arm.
He must ransom himself by payment of a forfeit.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 39.</note>
Near Ratzeburg when the master or other person of
mark enters the field or passes by it, all the harvesters
stop work and march towards him in a body, the men
with their scythes in front. On meeting him they
form up in line, men and women. The men stick the
poles of their scythes in the ground, as they do in
whetting them; then they take off their caps and hang
them on the scythes, while their leader stands forward
and makes a speech. When he has done, they all
whet their scythes in measured time very loudly, after
which they put on their caps. Two of the women
binders then come forward; one of them ties the
master or stranger (as the case may be) with corn-ears
<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>
or with a silken band; the other delivers a rhyming
address. The following are specimens of the speeches
made by the reaper on these occasions. In some parts
of Pomerania every passer-by is stopped, his way
being barred with a corn-rope. The reapers form a
circle round him and sharpen their scythes, while their
leader says&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>The men are ready,</q></l>
<l>The scythes are bent,</l>
<l>The corn is great and small,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>The gentleman must be mowed.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Then the process of whetting the scythes is repeated.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Myth. Forsch.</hi>
p. 39 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
At Ramin, in the district of Stettin, the stranger, standing
encircled by the reapers, is thus addressed&mdash;
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>We'll stroke the gentleman</q></l>
<l>With our naked sword,</l>
<l>Wherewith we shear meadows and fields.</l>
<l>We shear princes and lords.</l>
<l>Labourers are often athirst;</l>
<l>If the gentleman will stand beer and brandy</l>
<l>The joke will soon be over.</l>
<l>But, if our prayer he does not like,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>The sword has a right to strike.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 40. For the speeches made
by the woman who binds the stranger
or the master, see <hi rend='italic'>ib.</hi> p. 41; Lemke,
<hi rend='italic'>Volksthümliches in Ostpreussen</hi>, i. 23 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
That in these customs the whetting of the scythes
is really meant as a preliminary to mowing appears
from the following variation of the preceding customs.
In the district of Lüneburg when any one enters the
harvest-field, he is asked whether he will engage a
good fellow. If he says yes, the harvesters mow some
swaths, yelling and screaming, and then ask him for
drink-money.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Myth. Forsch.</hi> p.
41 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
On the threshing-floor strangers are also regarded
as embodiments of the corn-spirit, and are treated
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
accordingly. At Wiedingharde in Schleswig when a
stranger comes to the threshing-floor he is asked
<q>Shall I teach you the flail-dance?</q> If he says yes,
they put the arms of the threshing-flail round his neck
(as if he were a sheaf of corn), and press them together
so tightly that he is nearly choked.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 42.</note> In some parishes
of Wermland (Sweden) when a stranger enters the
threshing-floor where the threshers are at work, they
say that <q>they will teach him the threshing-song.</q>
Then they put a flail round his neck and a straw rope
about his body. Also, as we have seen, if a stranger
woman enters the threshing-floor, the threshers put
a flail round her body and a wreath of corn-stalks
round her neck, and call out, <q>See the Corn-woman!
See! that is how the Corn-maiden looks!</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 42. See above, p. <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>. In
Thüringen a being called the Rush-cutter
used to be much dreaded. On
the morning of St. John's Day he was
wont to walk through the fields with
sickles tied to his ankles cutting avenues
in the corn as he walked. To detect
him, seven bundles of brushwood were
silently threshed with the flail on the
threshing-floor, and the stranger who
appeared at the door of the barn during
the threshing was the Rush-cutter.
Witzschel, <hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche
aus Thüringen</hi>, p. 221. With
the <hi rend='italic'>Binsenschneider</hi> compare the <hi rend='italic'>Bilschneider</hi>.
Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. 210 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
In these customs, observed both on the harvest-field
and on the threshing-floor, a passing stranger is
regarded as a personification of the corn, in other
words, as the corn-spirit; and a show is made of
treating him like the corn by mowing, binding, and
threshing him. If the reader still doubts whether
European peasants can really regard a passing stranger
in this light, the following custom should set their
doubts at rest. During the madder-harvest in the
Dutch province of Zealand a stranger passing by a
field where the people are digging the madder-roots
will sometimes call out to them <foreign lang='nl' rend='italic'>Koortspillers</foreign> (a term
of reproach). Upon this, two of the fleetest runners
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
make after him, and, if they catch him, they bring
him back to the madder-field and bury him in the
earth up to his middle at least, jeering at him the
while; then they ease nature before his face.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 47 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> This
last act is to be explained as follows. The spirit
of the corn and of other cultivated plants is sometimes
conceived, not as immanent in the plant, but
as its owner; hence the cutting of the corn at harvest,
the digging of the roots, and the gathering of fruit
from the fruit-trees are each and all of them acts
of spoliation, which strip him of his property and
reduce him to poverty. Hence he is often known as
<q>the Poor Man</q> or <q>the Poor Woman.</q> Thus in the
neighbourhood of Eisenach a small sheaf is sometimes
left standing on the field for <q>the Poor Old Woman.</q><note place='foot'><p><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 48. To prevent a rationalistic
explanation of this custom, which,
like most rationalistic explanations of
folk-custom, would be wrong, it may be
pointed out that a little of the crop is
sometimes left on the field for the spirit
under other names than <q>the Poor Old
Woman.</q> Thus in a village of the
Tilsit district, the last sheaf was left
standing on the field <q>for the Old
Rye-woman.</q> <hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 337. In Neftenbach
(Canton of Zürich) the first three
ears of corn reaped are thrown away
on the field <q>to satisfy the Corn-mother
and to make the next year's
crop abundant.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> In Thüringen
when the after-grass (<foreign rend='italic'>Grummet</foreign>) is
being got in, a little heap is left lying
on the field; it belongs to <q>the Little
Wood-woman</q> in return for the blessing
she has bestowed. Witzschel,
<hi rend='italic'>Sagen, Sitten und Gebräuche aus
Thüringen</hi>, p. 224. At Kupferberg,
Bavaria, some corn is left standing on
the field when the rest has been cut.
Of this corn left standing, they say
that <q>it belongs to the Old Woman,</q>
to whom it is dedicated in the following
words&mdash;
</p>
<p>
<q>We give it to the Old Woman;<lb/>
She shall keep it.<lb/>
Next year may she be to us<lb/>
As kind as this time she has been.</q>
</p>
<p>
<hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 337 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> These last expressions
are quite conclusive. See also Mannhardt,
<hi rend='italic'>Korndämonen</hi>, p. 7 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi> In
Russia a patch of unreaped corn is
left in the field and the ears are knotted
together; this is called <q>the plaiting
of the beard of Volos.</q> <q>The unreaped
patch is looked upon as tabooed;
and it is believed that if any
one meddles with it he will shrivel up,
and become twisted like the interwoven
ears.</q> Ralston, <hi rend='italic'>Songs of the
Russian People</hi>, p. 251. In the North-east
of Scotland a few stalks were
sometimes left unreaped for the benefit
of <q>the aul' man.</q> W. Gregor,
<hi rend='italic'>Folk-lore of the North-East of Scotland</hi>,
p. 182. Here <q>the aul' man</q> is
probably the equivalent of the Old Man
(<foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>der Alte</foreign>) of Germany.</p></note>
At Marksuhl, near Eisenach, the puppet formed out of
the last sheaf is itself called <q>the Poor Woman.</q> At
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
Alt Lest in Silesia the man who binds the last sheaf is
called the Beggar-man.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 48.</note> In a village near Roeskilde,
in Zealand (Denmark), old-fashioned peasants sometimes
make up the last sheaf into a rude puppet, which
is called the Rye-beggar.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 48 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> In Southern Schonen the
sheaf which is bound last is called the Beggar; it
is made bigger than the rest and is sometimes dressed
in clothes. In the district of Olmütz the last sheaf is
called the Beggar; it is given to an old woman, who
must carry it home, limping on one foot.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 49.</note> Thus when
the corn-spirit is conceived as a being who is robbed
of his store and impoverished by the harvesters, it is
natural that his representative&mdash;the passing stranger&mdash;should
upbraid them; and it is equally natural that
they should seek to disable him from pursuing them
and recapturing the stolen property. Now, it is an old
superstition that by easing nature on the spot where a
robbery is committed, the robbers secure themselves,
for a certain time, against interruption.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 49 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Wuttke, <hi rend='italic'>Der deutsche
Volksaberglaube</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> § 400; Töppen, <hi rend='italic'>Aberglaube
aus Masuren</hi>,<hi rend='vertical-align: super'>2</hi> p. 57.</note> The fact,
therefore, that the madder-diggers resort to this
proceeding in presence of the stranger proves that
they consider themselves robbers and him as the
person robbed. Regarded as such, he must be the
natural owner of the madder-roots; that is, their spirit
or demon; and this conception is carried out by
burying him, like the madder-roots, in the ground.<note place='foot'>The explanation of the custom is
Mannhardt's. <hi rend='italic'>M. F.</hi> p. 49.</note>
The Greeks, it may be observed, were quite familiar
with the idea that a passing stranger may be a god.
Homer says that the gods in the likeness of foreigners
roam up and down cities.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Odyssey</hi>, xvii. 485 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> Cp. Plato,
<hi rend='italic'>Sophist</hi>, 216 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a</hi>.</note>
</p>

<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>

<p>
Thus in these harvest-customs of modern Europe
the person who cuts, binds, or threshes the last corn is
treated as an embodiment of the corn-spirit by being
wrapt up in sheaves, killed in mimicry by agricultural
implements, and thrown into the water.<note place='foot'>For throwing him into the water,
see p. <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>.</note> These coincidences
with the Lityerses story seem to prove that
the latter is a genuine description of an old Phrygian
harvest-custom. But since in the modern parallels the
killing of the personal representative of the corn-spirit
is necessarily omitted or at most enacted only in
mimicry, it is necessary to show that in rude society
human beings have been commonly killed as an agricultural
ceremony to promote the fertility of the fields.
The following examples will make this plain.
</p>

<p>
The Indians of Guayaquil (Ecuador) used to sacrifice
human blood and the hearts of men when they sowed
their fields.<note place='foot'>Cieza de Leon, <hi rend='italic'>Travels</hi>, translated
by Markham, p. 203 (Hakluyt
Society, 1864).</note> At a Mexican harvest-festival, when the
first-fruits of the season were offered to the sun, a
criminal was placed between two immense stones,
balanced opposite each other, and was crushed by
them as they fell together. His remains were buried,
and a feast and dance followed. This sacrifice was
known as <q>the meeting of the stones.</q><note place='foot'>Brasseur de Bourbourg, <hi rend='italic'>Histoire
des Nations civilisées du Mexique</hi>, i.
274; Bancroft, <hi rend='italic'>Native Races of the
Pacific States</hi>, ii. 340.</note> Another
series of human sacrifices offered in Mexico to make
the maize thrive has been already referred to.<note place='foot'>Bastian, <hi rend='italic'>Die Culturländer des alten
Amerika</hi>, ii. 639 (quoting Herrara).
See above, p. 307.</note> The
Pawnees annually sacrificed a human victim in spring
when they sowed their fields. The sacrifice was
believed to have been enjoined on them by the
Morning Star, or by a certain bird which the Morning
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
Star had sent to them as its messenger. The bird
was stuffed and preserved as a powerful <q>medicine.</q>
They thought that an omission of this sacrifice would
be followed by the total failure of the crops of maize,
beans, and pumpkins. The victim was a captive of
either sex. He was clad in the gayest and most costly
attire, was fattened on the choicest food, and carefully
kept in ignorance of his doom. When he was fat
enough, they bound him to a cross in the presence of
the multitude, danced a solemn dance, then cleft his
head with a tomahawk and shot him with arrows.
According to one trader, the squaws then cut pieces of
flesh from the victim's body, with which they greased
their hoes; but this was denied by another trader who
had been present at the ceremony. Immediately after
the sacrifice the people proceeded to plant their fields.
A particular account has been preserved of the sacrifice
of a Sioux girl by the Pawnees in April 1837 or
1838. The girl had been kept for six months and
well treated. Two days before the sacrifice she was
led from wigwam to wigwam, accompanied by the
whole council of chiefs and warriors. At each lodge
she received a small billet of wood and a little paint,
which she handed to the warrior next to her. In this
way she called at every wigwam, receiving at each the
same present of wood and paint. On the 22d of
April she was taken out to be sacrificed, attended by
the warriors, each of whom carried two pieces of wood
which he had received from her hands. She was
burned for some time over a slow fire, and then shot
to death with arrows. The chief sacrificer next tore
out her heart and devoured it. While her flesh was
still warm it was cut in small pieces from the bones,
put in little baskets, and taken to a neighbouring cornfield.
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
Here the head chief took a piece of the flesh
from a basket and squeezed a drop of blood upon
the newly-deposited grains of corn. His example
was followed by the rest, till all the seed had been
sprinkled with the blood; it was then covered up
with earth.<note place='foot'>E. James, <hi rend='italic'>Account of an Expedition
from Pittsburgh to the Rocky Mountains</hi>,
ii. 80 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Schoolcraft, <hi rend='italic'>Indian Tribes</hi>,
v. 77 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; De Smet, <hi rend='italic'>Voyages aux
Montagnes Rocheuses</hi>, nouvelle ed.
1873, p. 121 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi> The accounts by
Schoolcraft and De Smet of the sacrifice
of the Sioux girl are independent and
supplement each other.</note>
</p>

<p>
A West African queen used to sacrifice a man and
woman in the month of March. They were killed with
spades and hoes, and their bodies buried in the middle
of a field which had just been tilled.<note place='foot'>Labat, <hi rend='italic'>Relation historique de
l'Ethiopie occidentale</hi>, i. 380.</note> At Lagos in
Guinea it was the custom annually to impale a young
girl alive soon after the spring equinox in order to
secure good crops. Along with her were sacrificed
sheep and goats, which, with yams, heads of maize,
and plantains, were hung on stakes on each side of
her. The victims were bred up for the purpose in the
king's seraglio, and their minds had been so powerfully
wrought upon by the fetish men that they went cheerfully
to their fate.<note place='foot'>John Adams, <hi rend='italic'>Sketches taken during
Ten Voyages in Africa between the
years 1786 and 1800</hi>, p. 25.</note> A similar sacrifice is still annually
offered at Benin, Guinea.<note place='foot'>P. Bouche, <hi rend='italic'>La Côte des Esclaves</hi>,
p. 132.</note> The Marimos, a Bechuana
tribe, sacrifice a human being for the crops. The
victim chosen is generally a short, stout man. He is
seized by violence or intoxicated and taken to the
fields, where he is killed amongst the wheat to serve
as <q>seed</q> (so they phrase it). After his blood has
coagulated in the sun it is burned along with the
frontal bone, the flesh attached to it, and the brain;
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
the ashes are then scattered over the ground to fertilise
it. The rest of the body is eaten.<note place='foot'>Arbousset et Daumas, <hi rend='italic'>Voyage
d'exploration au Nord-est de la Colonie
du Cap de Bonne-Esperance</hi>, p. 117 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note>
</p>

<p>
The Gonds of India, a Dravidian race, kidnapped
Brahman boys, and kept them as victims to be sacrificed
on various occasions. At sowing and reaping,
after a triumphal procession, one of the lads was slain
by being punctured with a poisoned arrow. His blood
was then sprinkled over the ploughed field or the ripe
crop, and his flesh was devoured.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Panjab Notes and Queries</hi>, ii. No.
721.</note>
</p>

<p>
But the best known case of human sacrifices,
systematically offered to ensure good crops, is
supplied by the Khonds or Kandhs, another Dravidian
race in Bengal. Our knowledge of them
is derived from the accounts written by British
officers who, forty or fifty years ago, were engaged
in putting them down.<note place='foot'>Major S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>Memorials
of Service in India</hi>, p. 113 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>;
Major-General John Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>Wild
Tribes of Khondistan</hi>, pp. 52-58, etc.</note> The sacrifices were offered
to the Earth Goddess, Tari Pennu or Bera Pennu,
and were believed to ensure good crops and immunity
from all disease and accidents. In particular,
they were considered necessary in the cultivation
of turmeric, the Khonds arguing that the
turmeric could not have a deep red colour without
the shedding of blood.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 56.</note> The victim or Meriah
was acceptable to the goddess only if he had been
purchased, or had been born a victim&mdash;that is, the
son of a victim father&mdash;or had been devoted as a
child by his father or guardian. Khonds in distress
often sold their children for victims, <q>considering the
beatification of their souls certain, and their death, for
the benefit of mankind, the most honourable possible.</q>
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
A man of the Panua tribe was once seen to load a
Khond with curses, and finally to spit in his face,
because the Khond had sold for a victim his own
child, whom the Panua had wished to marry. A
party of Khonds, who saw this, immediately pressed
forward to comfort the seller of his child, saying,
<q>Your child has died that all the world may live, and
the Earth Goddess herself will wipe that spittle from
your face.</q><note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 115 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> The victims were often kept for years
before they were sacrificed. Being regarded as consecrated
beings, they were treated with extreme
affection, mingled with deference, and were welcomed
wherever they went. A Meriah youth, on attaining
maturity, was generally given a wife, who was herself
usually a Meriah or victim; and with her he received
a portion of land and farm-stock. Their offspring
were also victims. Human sacrifices were offered to
the Earth Goddess by tribes, branches of tribes, or
villages, both at periodical festivals and on extraordinary
occasions. The periodical sacrifices were
generally so arranged by tribes and divisions of tribes
that each head of a family was enabled, at least once
a year, to procure a shred of flesh for his fields,
generally about the time when his chief crop was
laid down.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> p. 113.</note>
</p>

<p>
The mode of performing these tribal sacrifices
was as follows. Ten or twelve days before the
sacrifice, the victim was devoted by cutting off his
hair, which, until then, was kept unshorn. Crowds
of men and women assembled to witness the sacrifice;
none might be excluded, since the sacrifice
was declared to be <q>for all mankind.</q> It was
preceded by several days of wild revelry and gross
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
debauchery.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> p. 117
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; J. Campbell, p. 112.</note> On the day before the sacrifice the
victim, dressed in a new garment, was led forth from
the village in solemn procession, with music and dancing,
to the Meriah grove, which was a clump of high
forest trees standing a little way from the village and
untouched by the axe. In this grove the victim was
tied to a post, which was sometimes placed between
two plants of the sankissar shrub. He was then
anointed with oil, ghee, and turmeric, and adorned
with flowers; and <q>a species of reverence, which it
is not easy to distinguish from adoration,</q> was paid
to him throughout the day.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, p. 118.</note> A great struggle now
arose to obtain the smallest relic from his person;
a particle of the turmeric paste with which he was
smeared, or a drop of his spittle, was esteemed
of sovereign virtue, especially by the women. The
crowd danced round the post to music, and, addressing
the earth, said, <q>O God, we offer this sacrifice to you;
give us good crops, seasons, and health.</q><note place='foot'>J. Campbell, p. 54.</note>
</p>

<p>
On the last morning the orgies, which had been
scarcely interrupted during the night, were resumed,
and continued till noon, when they ceased, and the
assembly proceeded to consummate the sacrifice.
The victim was again anointed with oil, and each
person touched the anointed part, and wiped the oil
on his own head. In some places the victim was
then taken in procession round the village, from door
to door, where some plucked hair from his head, and
others begged for a drop of his spittle, with which
they anointed their heads.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi> pp. 55, 112.</note> As the victim might
not be bound nor make any show of resistance, the
<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>
bones of his arms and, if necessary, his legs were
broken; but often this precaution was rendered
unnecessary by stupefying him with opium.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, p. 119; J. Campbell,
p. 113.</note> The
mode of putting him to death varied in different
places. One of the commonest modes seems to
have been strangulation, or squeezing to death.
The branch of a green tree was cleft several feet
down the middle; the victim's neck (in other places,
his chest) was inserted in the cleft, which the priest,
aided by his assistants, strove with all his force to
close.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, p. 127. Instead
of the branch of a green tree, Campbell
mentions two strong planks or bamboos
(p. 57) or a slit bamboo (p. 182).</note> Then he wounded the victim slightly with
his axe, whereupon the crowd rushed at the victim
and cut the flesh from the bones, leaving the head
and bowels untouched. Sometimes he was cut up
alive.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, pp. 56, 58, 120.</note> In Chinna Kimedy he was dragged along
the fields, surrounded by the crowd, who, avoiding
his head and intestines, hacked the flesh from his
body with their knives till he died.<note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of Bengal</hi>, p.
288, quoting Colonel Campbell's Report.</note> Another very
common mode of sacrifice in the same district was
to fasten the victim to the proboscis of a wooden
elephant, which revolved on a stout post, and, as it
whirled round, the crowd cut the flesh from the victim
while life remained. In some villages Major Campbell
found as many as fourteen of these wooden elephants,
which had been used at sacrifices.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, p. 126. The elephant
represented the Earth Goddess herself,
who was here conceived in elephant-form;
Campbell, pp. 51, 126. In the
hill tracts of Goomsur she was represented
in peacock-form, and the post
to which the victim was bound bore
the effigy of a peacock, Campbell, p.
54.</note> In one district the
victim was put to death slowly by fire. A low stage
was formed, sloping on either side like a roof; upon it
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
the victim was placed, his limbs wound round with
cords to confine his struggles. Fires were then
lighted and hot brands applied, to make him roll up
and down the slopes of the stage as long as possible;
for the more tears he shed the more abundant would
be the supply of rain. Next day the body was cut
to pieces.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, p. 130.</note>
</p>

<p>
The flesh cut from the victim was instantly taken
home by the persons who had been deputed by
each village to bring it. To secure its rapid arrival,
it was sometimes forwarded by relays of men, and
conveyed with postal fleetness fifty or sixty miles.<note place='foot'>Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>Ethnology of Bengal</hi>, p.
288, referring to Colonel Campbell's
Report.</note>
In each village all who stayed at home fasted rigidly
until the flesh arrived. The bearer deposited it in the
place of public assembly, where it was received by the
priest and the heads of families. The priest divided
it into two portions, one of which he offered to
the Earth Goddess by burying it in a hole in the
ground with his back turned, and without looking.
Then each man added a little earth to bury it, and
the priest poured water on the spot from a hill gourd.
The other portion of flesh he divided into as many
shares as there were heads of houses present. Each
head of a house rolled his shred of flesh in leaves, and
buried it in his favourite field, placing it in the earth
behind his back without looking.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, p. 129. Cp. J.
Campbell, pp. 55, 58, 113, 121, 187.</note> In some places
each man carried his portion of flesh to the stream
which watered his fields, and there hung it on a pole.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, p. 182.</note>
For three days thereafter no house was swept; and, in
one district, strict silence was observed, no fire might
be given out, no wood cut, and no strangers received.
<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>
The remains of the human victim (namely, the head,
bowels, and bones) were watched by strong parties
the night after the sacrifice; and next morning they
were burned, along with a whole sheep, on a funeral
pile. The ashes were scattered over the fields, laid
as paste over the houses and granaries, or mixed with
the new corn to preserve it from insects.<note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, p. 128; Dalton, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Sometimes,
however, the head and bones were buried, not burnt.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, pp. 55, 182.</note>
After the suppression of the human sacrifices, inferior
victims were substituted in some places; for instance, in
the capital of Chinna Kimedy a goat took the place
of a human victim.<note place='foot'>J. Campbell, p. 187.</note>
</p>

<p>
In these Khond sacrifices the Meriahs are represented
by our authorities as victims offered to propitiate
the Earth Goddess. But from the treatment
of the victims both before and after death it appears
that the custom cannot be explained as merely a
propitiatory sacrifice. A part of the flesh certainly
was offered to the Earth Goddess, but the rest of the
flesh was buried by each householder in his fields, and
the ashes of the other parts of the body were scattered
over the fields, laid as paste on the granaries, or mixed
with the new corn. These latter customs imply that
to the body of the Meriah there was ascribed a direct
or intrinsic power of making the crops to grow, quite
independent of the indirect efficacy which it might
have as an offering to secure the good-will of the deity.
In other words, the flesh and ashes of the victim were
believed to be endowed with a magical or physical
power of fertilising the land. The same intrinsic power
was ascribed to the blood and tears of the Meriah, his
blood causing the redness of the turmeric and his tears
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
producing rain; for it can hardly be doubted that,
originally at least, the tears were supposed to produce
rain, not merely to prognosticate it. Similarly the
custom of pouring water on the buried flesh of the
Meriah was no doubt a rain-charm. Again, intrinsic
supernatural power as an attribute of the Meriah
appears in the sovereign virtue believed to reside in
anything that came from his person, as his hair or
spittle. The ascription of such power to the Meriah
indicates that he was much more than a mere man sacrificed
to propitiate a deity. Once more, the extreme
reverence paid him points to the same conclusion.
Major Campbell speaks of the Meriah as <q>being regarded
as something more than mortal,</q><note place='foot'>J. Campbell, p. 112.</note> and Major
Macpherson says, <q>A species of reverence, which it is
not easy to distinguish from adoration, is paid to him.</q><note place='foot'>S. C. Macpherson, p. 118.</note>
In short, the Meriah appears to have been regarded
as divine. As such, he may originally have represented
the Earth deity or perhaps a deity of vegetation;
though in later times he came to be regarded rather as
a victim offered to a deity than as himself an incarnate
deity. This later view of the Meriah as a
victim rather than a god may perhaps have received
undue emphasis from the European writers who have
described the Khond religion. Habituated to the later
idea of sacrifice as an offering made to a god for the
purpose of conciliating his favour, European observers
are apt to interpret all religious slaughter in this sense,
and to suppose that wherever such slaughter takes
place, there must necessarily be a deity to whom the
slaughter is believed by the slayers to be acceptable.
Thus their preconceived ideas unconsciously colour
and warp their descriptions of savage rites.
</p>

<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>

<p>
The same custom of killing the representative of a
god, of which strong traces appear in the Khond
sacrifices, may perhaps be detected in some of the
other human sacrifices described above. Thus the
ashes of the slaughtered Marimo were scattered over
the fields; the blood of the Brahman lad was put
on the crop and field; and the blood of the Sioux
girl was allowed to trickle on the seed.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>.</note> Again, the
identification of the victim with the corn, in other
words, the view that he is an embodiment or spirit of
the corn, is brought out in the pains which seem to be
taken to secure a physical correspondence between him
and the natural object which he embodies or represents.
Thus the Mexicans killed young victims for the young
corn and old ones for the ripe corn; the Marimos sacrifice,
as <q>seed,</q> a short, fat man, the shortness of his
stature corresponding to that of the young corn, his
fatness to the condition which it is desired that the
crops may attain; and the Pawnees fattened their
victims probably with the same view. Again, the
identification of the victim with the corn comes out
in the African custom of killing him with spades and
hoes, and the Mexican custom of grinding him, like
corn, between two stones.
</p>

<p>
One more point in these savage customs deserves
to be noted. The Pawnee chief devoured the heart
of the Sioux girl, and the Marimos and Gonds ate the
victim's flesh. If, as we suppose, the victim was regarded
as divine, it follows that in eating his flesh his
worshippers were partaking of the body of their god.
To this point we shall return later on.
</p>

<p>
The savage rites just described offer analogies
to the harvest customs of Europe. Thus the fertilising
<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>
virtue ascribed to the corn-spirit is shown
equally in the savage custom of mixing the victim's
blood or ashes with the seed-corn and the European
custom of mixing the grain from the last sheaf with
the young corn in spring.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>.</note> Again, the identification
of the person with the corn appears alike in the
savage custom of adapting the age and stature of
the victim to the age and stature (actual or expected)
of the crop; in the Scotch and Styrian rules that when
the corn-spirit is conceived as the Maiden the last corn
shall be cut by a young maiden, but when it is conceived
as the Corn-mother it shall be cut by an old woman;<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>.</note>
in the Lothringian warning given to old women to save
themselves when the Old Woman is being killed, that
is, when the last corn is being threshed;<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg372'>372</ref>.</note> and in the
Tyrolese expectation that if the man who gives the last
stroke at threshing is tall, the next year's corn will be
tall also.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>.</note> Further, the same identification is implied
in the savage custom of killing the representative of
the corn-spirit with hoes or spades or by grinding him
between stones, and in the European custom of pretending
to kill him with the scythe or the flail. Once
more the Khond custom of pouring water on the buried
flesh of the victim is parallel to the European customs
of pouring water on the personal representative of the
corn-spirit or plunging him into a stream.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref>, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref>, <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>.</note> Both the
Khond and the European customs are rain-charms.
</p>

<p>
To return now to the Lityerses story. It has been
shown that in rude society human beings have been
commonly killed to promote the growth of the crops.
There is therefore no improbability in the supposition
that they may once have been killed for a like purpose
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
in Phrygia and Europe; and when Phrygian legend and
European folk-custom, closely agreeing with each other,
point to the conclusion that men were so slain, we are
bound, provisionally at least, to accept the conclusion.
Further, both the Lityerses story and European
harvest customs agree in indicating that the person
slain was slain as a representative of the corn-spirit,
and this indication is in harmony with the view which
savages appear to take of the victim slain to make the
crops flourish. On the whole, then, we may fairly
suppose that both in Phrygia and in Europe the representative
of the corn-spirit was annually killed upon the
harvest-field. Grounds have been already shown for
believing that similarly in Europe the representative of
the tree-spirit was annually slain. The proofs of these
two remarkable and closely analogous customs are
entirely independent of each other. Their coincidence
seems to furnish fresh presumption in favour of both.
</p>

<p>
To the question, how was the representative of
the corn-spirit chosen? one answer has been already
given. Both the Lityerses story and European folk-custom
show that passing strangers were regarded
as manifestations of the corn-spirit escaping from
the cut or threshed corn, and as such were seized
and slain. But this is not the only answer which
the evidence suggests. According to one version
of the Phrygian legend the victims of Lityerses were
not passing strangers but persons whom he had
vanquished in a reaping contest; and though it is not
said that he killed, but only that he thrashed them, we
can hardly avoid supposing that in one version of the
story the vanquished reapers, like the strangers in the
other version, were said to have been wrapt up by
Lityerses in corn-sheaves and so beheaded. The
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
supposition is countenanced by European harvest-customs.
We have seen that in Europe there is sometimes
a contest amongst the reapers to avoid being last,
and that the person who is vanquished in this competition,
that is, who cuts the last corn, is often roughly
handled. It is true we have not found that a pretence
is made of killing him; but on the other hand we have
found that a pretence is made of killing the man who
gives the last stroke at threshing, that is, who is vanquished
in the threshing contest.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg374'>374</ref>.</note> Now, since it is in
the character of representative of the corn-spirit that
the thresher of the last corn is slain in mimicry, and
since the same representative character attaches (as we
have seen) to the cutter and binder as well as to the
thresher of the last corn, and since the same repugnance
is evinced by harvesters to be last in any one of these
labours, we may conjecture that a pretence has been
commonly made of killing the reaper and binder as well
as the thresher of the last corn, and that in ancient
times this killing was actually carried out. This conjecture
is corroborated by the common superstition that
whoever cuts the last corn must die soon.<note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Korndämonen</hi>, p. 5.</note> Sometimes
it is thought that the person who binds the last sheaf
on the field will die in the course of next year.<note place='foot'>Pfannenschmid, <hi rend='italic'>Germanische Erntefeste</hi>, p. 98.</note> The
reason for fixing on the reaper, binder, or thresher of
the last corn as the representative of the corn-spirit may
be this. The corn-spirit is supposed to lurk as long
as he can in the corn, retreating before the reapers, the
binders, and the threshers at their work. But when
he is forcibly expelled from his ultimate refuge in the
last corn cut or the last sheaf bound or the last grain
threshed, he necessarily assumes some other form than
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
that of the corn-stalks which had hitherto been his
garments or body. And what form can the expelled
corn-spirit assume more naturally than that of the person
who stands nearest to the corn from which he (the
corn-spirit) has just been expelled? But the person in
question is necessarily the reaper, binder, or thresher
of the last corn. He or she, therefore, is seized and
treated as the corn-spirit himself.
</p>

<p>
Thus the person who was killed on the harvest-field
as the representative of the corn-spirit may have
been either a passing stranger or the harvester who
was last at reaping, binding, or threshing. But there
is a third possibility, to which ancient legend and
modern folk-custom alike point. Lityerses not only
put strangers to death; he was himself slain, and
probably in the same way as he had slain others,
namely, by being wrapt in a corn-sheaf, beheaded, and
cast into the river; and it is implied that this happened
to Lityerses on his own land. Similarly in modern
harvest-customs the pretence of killing appears to be
carried out quite as often on the person of the master
(farmer or squire) as on that of strangers.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg376'>376</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Now when
we remember that Lityerses was said to have been the
son of the King of Phrygia, and combine with this the
tradition that he was put to death, apparently as a
representative of the corn-spirit, we are led to conjecture
that we have here another trace of the custom of
annually slaying one of those divine or priestly kings
who are known to have held ghostly sway in many
parts of Western Asia and particularly in Phrygia.
The custom appears, as we have seen,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>.</note> to have been
so far modified in places that the king's son was
slain in the king's stead. Of the custom thus
<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>
modified the story of Lityerses would therefore be
a reminiscence.
</p>

<p>
Turning now to the relation of the Phrygian
Lityerses to the Phrygian Attis, it may be remembered
that at Pessinus&mdash;the seat of a priestly kingship&mdash;the
high-priest appears to have been annually slain
in the character of Attis, a god of vegetation, and that
Attis was described by an ancient authority as <q>a
reaped ear of corn.</q><note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref>.</note> Thus Attis, as an embodiment
of the corn-spirit, annually slain in the person of his
representative, might be thought to be ultimately
identical with Lityerses, the latter being simply the
rustic prototype out of which the state religion of Attis
was developed. It may have been so; but, on the
other hand, the analogy of European folk-custom
warns us that amongst the same people two distinct
deities of vegetation may have their separate personal
representatives, both of whom are slain in the character
of gods at different times of the year. For in Europe,
as we have seen, it appears that one man was commonly
slain in the character of the tree-spirit in spring,
and another in the character of the corn-spirit in
autumn. It may have been so in Phrygia also. Attis
was especially a tree-god, and his connection with corn
may have been only such an extension of the power
of a tree-spirit as is indicated in customs like the
Harvest-May.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref>.</note> Again, the representative of Attis
appears to have been slain in spring; whereas
Lityerses must have been slain in summer or autumn,
according to the time of the harvest in Phrygia.<note place='foot'>I do not know when the corn is
reaped in Phrygia; but considering the
high upland character of the country,
harvest is probably later there than on
the coasts of the Mediterranean.</note> On
the whole, then, while we are not justified in regarding
<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>
Lityerses as the prototype of Attis, the two may
be regarded as parallel products of the same religious
idea, and may have stood to each other as in Europe
the Old Man of harvest stands to the Wild Man, the
Leaf Man, etc., of spring. Both were spirits or deities
of vegetation, and the personal representatives of both
were annually slain. But whereas the Attis worship
became elevated into the dignity of a state religion
and spread to Italy, the rites of Lityerses seem
never to have passed the limits of their native
Phrygia, and always retained their character of rustic
ceremonies performed by peasants on the harvest-field.
At most a few villages may have clubbed together, as
amongst the Khonds, to procure a human victim to
be slain as representative of the corn-spirit for their
common benefit. Such victims may have been drawn
from the families of priestly kings or kinglets, which
would account for the legendary character of Lityerses
as the son of a Phrygian king. When villages did
not so club together, each village or farm may have
procured its own representative of the corn-spirit
by dooming to death either a passing stranger or the
harvester who cut, bound, or threshed the last sheaf.
It is hardly necessary to add that in Phrygia, as in
Europe, the old barbarous custom of killing a man on
the harvest-field or the threshing-floor had doubtless
passed into a mere pretence long before the classical
era, and was probably regarded by the reapers and
threshers themselves as no more than a rough jest
which the license of a harvest-home permitted them
to play off on a passing stranger, a comrade, or even
on their master himself.
</p>

<p>
I have dwelt on the Lityerses song at length
because it affords so many points of comparison with
<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>
European and savage folk-custom. The other harvest
songs of Western Asia and Egypt, to which attention
has been called above,<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> may now be dismissed much
more briefly. The similarity of the Bithynian Bormus<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref>.</note>
to the Phrygian Lityerses helps to bear out the interpretation
which has been given of the latter. Bormus,
whose death or rather disappearance was annually
mourned by the reapers in a plaintive song, was, like
Lityerses, a king's son or at least the son of a wealthy
and distinguished man. The reapers whom he watched
were at work on his own fields, and he disappeared in
going to fetch water for them; according to one version
of the story he was carried off by the (water)
nymphs.<note place='foot'>Hesychius, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> Βῶρμον.</note> Viewed in the light of the Lityerses story
and of European folk-custom, this disappearance of
Bormus is probably a reminiscence of the custom of
binding the farmer himself in a corn-sheaf and throwing
him into the water. The mournful strain which
the reapers sang was probably a lamentation over the
death of the corn-spirit, slain either in the cut corn or
in the person of a human representative; and the call
which they addressed to him may have been a prayer
that the corn-spirit might return in fresh vigour next
year.
</p>

<p>
The Phoenician Linus song was sung at the vintage,
at least in the west of Asia Minor, as we learn from
Homer; and this, combined with the legend of Syleus,
suggests that in ancient times passing strangers were
handled by vintagers and vine-diggers in much the
same way as they are said to have been handled by
the reaper Lityerses. The Lydian Syleus, so ran the
legend, compelled passers-by to dig for him in his
vineyard, till Hercules came and killed him and dug
<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>
up his vines by the roots.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, ii. 6, 3.</note> This seems to be the outline
of a legend like that of Lityerses; but neither
ancient writers nor modern folk-custom enable us to
fill in the details.<note place='foot'>The scurrilities exchanged in both
ancient and modern times between
vine-dressers, vintagers, and passers-by
seem to belong to a different category.
See W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Myth. Forsch.</hi> p.
53 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> But, further, the Linus song was
probably sung also by Phoenician reapers, for Herodotus
compares it to the Maneros song, which, as we
have seen, was a lament raised by Egyptian reapers
over the cut corn. Further, Linus was identified with
Adonis, and Adonis has some claims to be regarded
as especially a corn-deity.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi></note> Thus the Linus lament,
as sung at harvest, would be identical with the Adonis
lament; each would be the lamentation raised by
reapers over the dead corn-spirit. But whereas
Adonis, like Attis, grew into a stately figure of mythology,
adored and mourned in splendid cities far beyond
the limits of his Phoenician home, Linus appears to
have remained a simple ditty sung by reapers and
vintagers among the corn-sheaves and the vines. The
analogy of Lityerses and of folk-custom, both European
and savage, suggests that in Phoenicia the slain corn-spirit&mdash;the
dead Adonis&mdash;may formerly have been
represented by a human victim; and this suggestion
is possibly supported by the Harrân legend that
Thammuz (Adonis) was slain by his cruel lord, who
ground his bones in a mill and scattered them to the
wind.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref> <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> For in Mexico, as we have seen, the human
victim at harvest was crushed between two stones;
and both in India and Africa the ashes of the victim
were scattered over the fields.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>.</note> But the Harrân
legend may be only a mythical way of expressing the
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>
grinding of corn in the mill and the scattering of the
seed. It seems worth suggesting that the mock king
who was annually killed at the Babylonian festival of
the Sacaea on the 16th of the month Lous may have
represented Thammuz himself. For the historian
Berosus, who records the festival and its date, probably
used the Macedonian calendar, since he dedicated
his history to Antiochus Soter; and in his day the
Macedonian month Lous appears to have corresponded
to the Babylonian month Thammuz.<note place='foot'>For this fact of the probable correspondence
of the months, which supplies
so welcome a confirmation of the
conjecture in the text, I am indebted to
my friend Professor W. Robertson
Smith, who furnishes me with the following
note: <q>In the Syro-Macedonian
calendar Lous represents Ab,
not Tammuz. Was it different in
Babylon? I think it was, and one
month different, at least in the early
times of the Greek monarchy in Asia.
For we know from a Babylonian observation
in the Almagest (<hi rend='italic'>Ideler</hi>, I.
396) that in 229 <hi rend='smallcaps'>b.c.</hi> Xanthicus began
on February 26. It was therefore the
month before the equinoctial moon,
not Nisan but Adar, and consequently
Lous answered to the lunar month
Tammuz.</q></note> If this conjecture
is right, the view that the mock king at the
Sacaea was slain in the character of a god would be
established.
</p>

<p>
There is a good deal more evidence that in Egypt
the slain corn-spirit&mdash;the dead Osiris&mdash;was represented
by a human victim, whom the reapers slew on the
harvest-field, mourning his death in a dirge, to which
the Greeks, through a verbal misunderstanding, gave
the name of Maneros.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>.</note> For the legend of Busiris
seems to preserve a reminiscence of human sacrifices
once offered by the Egyptians in connection with the
worship of Osiris. Busiris was said to have been an
Egyptian king who sacrificed all strangers on the altar
of Zeus. The origin of the custom was traced to a
barrenness which afflicted the land of Egypt for nine
years. A Cyprian seer informed Busiris that the
barrenness would cease if a man were annually sacrificed
<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>
to Zeus. So Busiris instituted the sacrifice. But
when Hercules came to Egypt, and was being dragged
to the altar to be sacrificed, he burst his bonds and
slew Busiris and his son.<note place='foot'>Apollodorus, ii. 5, 11; Schol. on
Apollonius Rhodius, iv. 1396; Plutarch,
<hi rend='italic'>Parall.</hi> 38. Herodotus (ii. 45)
discredits the idea that the Egyptians
ever offered human sacrifices. But his
authority is not to be weighed against
that of Manetho (Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Is. et Os.</hi>
73), who affirms that they did.</note> Here then is a legend
that in Egypt a human victim was annually sacrificed
to prevent the failure of the crops, and a belief is
implied that an omission of the sacrifice would have
entailed a recurrence of that infertility which it was the
object of the sacrifice to prevent. So the Pawnees, as
we have seen, believed that an omission of the human
sacrifice at planting would have been followed by a
total failure of their crops. The name Busiris was
in reality the name of a city, <foreign rend='italic'>pe-Asar</foreign>, <q>the house
of Osiris</q><note place='foot'>E. Meyer, <hi rend='italic'>Geschichte des Alterthums</hi>,
i. § 57.</note> the city being so called because it contained
the grave of Osiris. The human sacrifices
were said to have been offered at his grave, and the
victims were red-haired men, whose ashes were scattered
abroad by means of winnowing-fans.<note place='foot'>Diodorus, i. 88; Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Is. et
Os.</hi> 73; cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>, 30, 33.</note> In the
light of the foregoing discussion, this Egyptian tradition
admits of a consistent and fairly probable explanation.
Osiris, the corn-spirit, was annually represented
at harvest by a stranger, whose red hair made him a
suitable representative of the ripe corn. This man,
in his representative character, was slain on the harvest-field,
and mourned by the reapers, who prayed at the
same time that the corn-spirit might revive and return
(<foreign rend='italic'>mââ-ne-rha</foreign>, Maneros) with renewed vigour in the
following year. Finally, the victim, or some part of
him, was burned, and the ashes scattered by winnowing-fans
<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>
over the fields to fertilise them. Here the
choice of the representative on the ground of his
resemblance to the corn which he was to represent
agrees with the Mexican and African customs already
described.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg307'>307</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref>.</note> Similarly the Romans sacrificed red-haired
puppies in spring, in the belief that the crops would
thus grow ripe and ruddy;<note place='foot'>Festus, <hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Catularia</hi>. Cp. <hi rend='italic'>id.</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>s.v.</hi> <hi rend='italic'>rutilae canes</hi>; Columella, x. 343;
Ovid, <hi rend='italic'>Fasti</hi>, iv. 905 <hi rend='italic'>sqq.</hi>; Pliny, <hi rend='italic'>N. H.</hi>
xviii. § 14.</note> and to this day in sowing
wheat a Bavarian sower will sometimes wear a golden
ring, that the corn may grow yellow.<note place='foot'>Panzer, <hi rend='italic'>Beitrag zur deutschen
Mythologie</hi>, ii. 207, No. 362; <hi rend='italic'>Bavaria,
Landes- und Volkskunde des Königreichs
Bayern</hi>, iii. 343.</note> Again, the
scattering of the Egyptian victim's ashes is identical
with the Marimo and Khond custom.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref>.</note> His identification
with the corn comes out again in the fact that
his ashes were winnowed; just as in Vendée a pretence
is made of threshing and winnowing the farmer's
wife, regarded as an embodiment of the corn-spirit; or
as in Mexico the victim was ground between stones;
or as in Africa he was slain with spades and hoes.<note place='foot'>Above, pp. <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref>.</note>
The story that the fragments of Osiris's body were
scattered up and down the land, and buried by Isis
on the spots where they lay,<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Is. et Os.</hi> 18.</note> may very well be a
reminiscence of a custom, like that observed by the
Khonds, of dividing the human victim in pieces and
burying the pieces, often at intervals of many miles
from each other, in the fields. However, it is possible
that the story of the dismemberment of Osiris, like
the similar story told of Thammuz, may have been
simply a mythical expression for the scattering of the
seed. Once more, the story that the body of Osiris
enclosed in a coffer was thrown by Typhon into the
<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>
Nile perhaps points to a custom of throwing the body
of the victim, or at least a portion of it, into the Nile
as a rain-charm, or rather to make the Nile rise. For
a similar purpose Phrygian reapers seem to have
thrown the headless bodies of their victims, wrapt in
corn-sheaves, into a river, and the Khonds poured
water on the buried flesh of the human victim. Probably
when Osiris ceased to be represented by a human
victim, an effigy of him was annually thrown into the
Nile, just as the effigy of his Syrian counterpart,
Adonis, used to be thrown into the sea at Alexandria.
Or water may have been simply poured over it, as on
the monument already mentioned a priest is seen
pouring water over the body of Osiris, from which corn
stalks are sprouting. The accompanying inscription,
<q>This is Osiris of the mysteries, who springs from
the returning waters,</q> bears out the view that at the
mysteries of Osiris a water-charm or irrigation-charm
was regularly performed by pouring water on his
effigy, or by throwing it into the Nile.
</p>

<p>
It may be objected that the red-haired victims were
slain as representatives not of Osiris, but of his enemy
Typhon; for the victims were called Typhonian, and
red was the colour of Typhon, black the colour of
Osiris.<note place='foot'>Plutarch, <hi rend='italic'>Is. et Os</hi>. 22, 30, 31, 33,
73.</note> The answer to this objection must be reserved
for the present. Meantime it may be pointed out that
if Osiris is often represented on the monuments as
black, he is still more commonly depicted as green,<note place='foot'>Wilkinson, <hi rend='italic'>Manners and Customs
of the Ancient Egyptians</hi> (ed. 1878),
iii. 81.</note>
appropriately enough for a corn-god, who may be conceived
as black while the seed is under ground, but as
green after it has sprouted. So the Greeks recognised
<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>
both a green and a black Demeter,<note place='foot'>Pausanias, i. 22, 3, viii. 5, 8, viii. 42, 1</note> and sacrificed to
the green Demeter in spring with mirth and gladness.<note place='foot'>Cornutus, <hi rend='italic'>De nat. deor.</hi> c. 28.</note>
</p>

<p>
Thus, if I am right, the key to the mysteries of
Osiris is furnished by the melancholy cry of the
Egyptian reapers, which down to Roman times could
be heard year after year sounding across the fields,
announcing the death of the corn-spirit, the rustic
prototype of Osiris. Similar cries, as we have seen,
were also heard on all the harvest-fields of Western
Asia. By the ancients they are spoken of as
songs; but to judge from the analysis of the names
Linus and Maneros, they probably consisted only of a
few words uttered in a prolonged musical note which
could be heard for a great distance. Such sonorous
and long-drawn cries, raised by a number of strong
voices in concert, must have had a striking effect,
and could hardly fail to arrest the attention of any
traveller who happened to be within hearing. The
sounds, repeated again and again, could probably be
distinguished with tolerable ease even at a distance;
but to a Greek traveller in Asia or Egypt the foreign
words would commonly convey no meaning, and he
might take them, not unnaturally, for the name of some
one (Maneros, Linos, Lityerses, Bormus), upon whom
the reapers were calling. And if his journey led him
through more countries than one, as Bithynia and
Phrygia, or Phoenicia and Egypt, while the corn was
being reaped, he would have an opportunity of comparing
the various harvest cries of the different peoples.
Thus we can readily account for the fact that these
harvest cries were so often noted and compared with
each other by the Greeks. Whereas, if they had been
<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>
regular songs, they could not have been heard at such
distances, and therefore could not have attracted the
attention of so many travellers; and, moreover, even
if the traveller were within hearing of them, he could
not so easily have picked out the words. To this day
Devonshire reapers utter cries of the same sort, and
perform on the field a ceremony exactly analogous
to that in which, if I am not mistaken, the rites of
Osiris originated. The cry and the ceremony are thus
described by an observer who wrote in the first half
of this century. <q>After the wheat is all cut, on most
farms in the north of Devon, the harvest people have
a custom of <q>crying the neck.</q> I believe that this practice
is seldom omitted on any large farm in that part
of the country. It is done in this way. An old man,
or some one else well acquainted with the ceremonies
used on the occasion (when the labourers are reaping
the last field of wheat), goes round to the shocks and
sheaves, and picks out a little bundle of all the best
ears he can find; this bundle he ties up very neat and
trim, and plats and arranges the straws very tastefully.
This is called <q>the neck</q> of wheat, or wheaten-ears.
After the field is cut out, and the pitcher once more
circulated, the reapers, binders, and the women, stand
round in a circle. The person with <q>the neck</q> stands
in the centre, grasping it with both his hands. He
first stoops and holds it near the ground, and all the
men forming the ring take off their hats, stooping and
holding them with both hands towards the ground.
They then all begin at once in a very prolonged and
harmonious tone to cry <q>the neck!</q> at the same time
slowly raising themselves upright, and elevating their
arms and hats above their heads; the person with <q>the
neck</q> also raising it on high. This is done three times.
<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>
They then change their cry to <q>wee yen!</q>&mdash;<q>way yen!</q>&mdash;which
they sound in the same prolonged and slow
manner as before, with singular harmony and effect,
three times. This last cry is accompanied by the same
movements of the body and arms as in crying <q>the
neck.</q>... After having thus repeated <q>the neck</q>
three times, and <q>wee yen,</q> or <q>way yen,</q> as often,
they all burst out into a kind of loud and joyous laugh,
flinging up their hats and caps into the air, capering
about and perhaps kissing the girls. One of them
then gets <q>the neck</q> and runs as hard as he can down
to the farmhouse, where the dairymaid or one of the
young female domestics stands at the door prepared
with a pail of water. If he who holds <q>the neck</q> can
manage to get into the house, in any way unseen, or
openly, by any other way than the door at which the
girl stands with the pail of water, then he may lawfully
kiss her; but, if otherwise, he is regularly soused with
the contents of the bucket. On a fine still autumn
evening, the <q>crying of the neck</q> has a wonderful
effect at a distance, far finer than that of the Turkish
muezzin, which Lord Byron eulogises so much, and
which he says is preferable to all the bells in Christendom.
I have once or twice heard upwards of twenty
men cry it, and sometimes joined by an equal number
of female voices. About three years back, on some
high grounds, where our people were harvesting, I
heard six or seven <q>necks</q> cried in one night, although
I know that some of them were four miles off. They
are heard through the quiet evening air, at a considerable
distance sometimes.</q><note place='foot'>Hone, <hi rend='italic'>Every-day Book</hi>, ii. c. 1170 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi></note> Again, Mrs. Bray tells
how, travelling in Devonshire, <q>she saw a party of
reapers standing in a circle on a rising ground, holding
<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>
their sickles aloft. One in the middle held up some
ears of corn tied together with flowers, and the party
shouted three times (what she writes as) <q>Arnack,
arnack, arnack, we <foreign rend='italic'>haven</foreign>, we <foreign rend='italic'>haven</foreign>, we <foreign rend='italic'>haven</foreign>.</q> They
went home, accompanied by women and children
carrying boughs of flowers, shouting and singing. The
man-servant who attended Mrs. Bray, said, <q>it was only
the people making their games, as they always did, <emph>to
the spirit of harvest</emph>.</q></q><note place='foot'>Miss C. S. Burne and Miss G. F.
Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>Shropshire Folk-lore</hi>, p. 372
<hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>, referring to Mrs. Bray's <hi rend='italic'>Traditions
of Devon</hi>, i. 330.</note> Here, as Miss Burne remarks,
<q><q>arnack, we haven!</q> is obviously in the Devon dialect,
<q>a neck (or nack)! we have un!</q></q> <q>The neck</q> is
generally hung up in the farmhouse, where it sometimes
remains for two or three years.<note place='foot'>Hone, <hi rend='italic'>op. cit.</hi> ii. 1172.</note> A similar
custom is still observed in some parts of Cornwall, as I
am informed by my friend Professor J. H. Middleton.
<q>The last sheaf is decked with ribbons. Two strong-voiced
men are chosen and placed (one with the sheaf)
on opposite sides of a valley. One shouts, <q>I've
gotten it.</q> The other shouts, <q>What hast gotten?</q>
The first answers, <q>I'se gotten the neck.</q></q>
</p>

<p>
In these Devonshire and Cornish customs a particular
bunch of ears, generally the last left standing,<note place='foot'>Brand, <hi rend='italic'>Popular Antiquities</hi>, ii. 20
(Bohn's ed.); Burne and Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>op.
cit.</hi> p. 371.</note>
is conceived as the neck of the corn-spirit, who is consequently
beheaded when the bunch is cut down.
Similarly in Shropshire the name <q>neck,</q> or <q>the
gander's neck,</q> used to be commonly given to the last
handful of ears left standing in the middle of the field,
when all the rest of the corn was cut. It was plaited
together, and the reapers, standing ten or twenty
paces off, threw their sickles at it. Whoever cut it
through was said to have cut off the gander's neck.
<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>
The <q>neck</q> was taken to the farmer's wife, who was
supposed to keep it in the house <q>for good luck</q> till
the next harvest came round.<note place='foot'>Burne and Jackson, <hi rend='italic'>l.c.</hi></note> Near Trèves, the
man who reaps the last standing corn <q>cuts the
goat's neck off.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Myth. Forsch.</hi> p.
185.</note> At Faslane, on the Gareloch
(Dumbartonshire), the last handful of standing corn
was sometimes called the <q>head.</q><note place='foot'>See above, p. <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>.</note> At Aurich, in
East Friesland, the man who reaps the last corn
<q>cuts the hare's tail off.</q><note place='foot'>W. Mannhardt, <hi rend='italic'>Myth. Forsch.</hi> p.
185.</note> In mowing down the
last corner of a field French reapers sometimes call
out, <q>We have the cat by the tail.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Ib.</hi></note> In Bresse
(Bourgogne) the last sheaf represented the fox. Beside
it a score of ears were left standing to form the tail,
and each reaper, going back some paces, threw his
sickle at it. He who succeeded in severing it <q>cut off
the fox's tail,</q> and a cry of <q><foreign rend='italic'>You cou cou!</foreign></q> was raised
in his honour.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Revue des Traditions populaires</hi>, ii.
500.</note> These examples leave no room to
doubt the meaning of the Devonshire and Cornish
expression <q>the neck,</q> as applied to the last sheaf.
The corn-spirit is conceived in human or animal form,
and the last standing corn is part of its body&mdash;its neck,
its head, or its tail. Sometimes, as we have seen, it is
regarded as the navel-string.<note place='foot'>Above, p. <ref target='Pg343'>343</ref>.</note> Lastly, the Devonshire
custom of drenching with water the person who brings
in <q>the neck</q> is a rain-charm, such as we have had
many examples of. Its parallel in the mysteries of
Osiris was the custom of pouring water on the image
of Osiris or on the person who represented him.
</p>

<p>
In Germany cries of <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Waul!</foreign> or <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Wol!</foreign> or <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Wôld!</foreign>
are sometimes raised by the reapers at cutting the last
corn. Thus in some places the last patch of standing
<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>
corn was called the <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Waul</foreign>-rye; a stick decked with
flowers was inserted in it, and the ears were fastened
to the stick. Then all the reapers took off their hats
and cried thrice, <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Waul! Waul! Waul!</foreign> Sometimes
they accompany the cry by clashing with their whetstones
on their scythes.<note place='foot'>U. Jahn, <hi rend='italic'>Die deutschen Opfergebräuche
bei Ackerbau und Viehzucht</hi>, pp.
166-169; Pfannenschmid, <hi rend='italic'>Germanische
Erntefeste</hi>, p. 104 <hi rend='italic'>sq.</hi>; Kuhn, <hi rend='italic'>Westfälische
Sagen, Gebräuche und Märchen</hi>,
ii. Nos. 491, 492; Kuhn und Schwartz,
<hi rend='italic'>Norddeutsche Sagen, Märchen und
Gebräuche</hi>, p. 395, No. 97; Lynker,
<hi rend='italic'>Deutsche Sagen und Sitten in hessischen
Gauen</hi>, p. 256, No. 340.</note>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
